cidc
Asthma
Epilepsy
Psoriasis
Osteoporosis
COPD
Anxiety
BPH
Ischaemic Heart Disease

CHRONIC DISEASE
MANAGEMENT
PROGRAMME
HANDBOOK FOR HEALTHCARE
PROFESSIONALS

Intentionally left blank






CONTENTS


CHAPTER ONE:
CDMP and CHAS
• Overview
• Clinical Guidelines and Clinical Data Submission

 CHAPTER TWO:
Registration and MediSave Use
• Policy on MediSave Use
• Registration Process for MediSave for CDMP
• Process of Making a MediSave Claim
• Audit
• Recommended Standards of Documentation to Support Claims

 CHAPTER THREE:
The Clinical Guidelines
• Guidelines for Participating Clinics and Practitioners
• Mental Health GP Partnership Programme (MHGPP) for CDMP
Mental Illnesses (CDMP-MI)
• Guidelines on MediSave Use for CDMP
• Guidelines on Use of CHAS Subsidy for CDMP Conditions
• Disease-Specific Guidelines for the CDMP Conditions

 CHAPTER FOUR:
Capture and Submission of Clinical Data
• Commencement of Clinical Data Submission
• Collection and Submission of Clinical Data
• Deadlines for Submission of Clinical Data to MOH

 CHAPTER FIVE:
Frequently Asked Questions
• Clinical Matters
• Registration Matters
• MediSave Claims, Reimbursement, Billing
• Data Submission, Clinical Improvement and Audits

CDMP Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
FOREWORD

This Handbook is written for all medical practitioners and healthcare institutions
participating in the Chronic Disease Management Programme (CDMP). We hope that it will
be especially useful to general practitioners on the Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS)
and Healthier SG, who will  care for individuals with chronic conditions as Singapore’s
population ages.

2.
The CDMP was first introduced in 2006. To reduce out-of-pocket expenses for
outpatient management of their chronic conditions and promote care-seeking behaviour,
eligible patients can utilise MediSave and enjoy subsidies at CHAS GP clinics for these
conditions. The launch of Healthier SG in 2023 aims to build upon our goals of appropriate
chronic disease management in the community, with a strong emphasis on preventive care
measures.

3.
MOH reviews the list of CDMP conditions regularly based on various considerations,
such as disease burden and effectiveness of early intervention to reduce complications. All
chronic conditions covered under CDMP are automatically extended to be in the list of
conditions eligible for CHAS Chronic subsidies.

4.
This Handbook aims to serve as a quick guide on the CDMP, covering a range of
practical issues from administrative and claims-related matters to broad guidelines on the
recommended key components of clinical care. The CDMP Handbook is not intended to be a
comprehensive clinical guide, but consolidates key components of locally relevant practice
guidelines and incorporates evidence-based advice to provide a succinct reference for
evidence-based practice.

5.
In addition to keeping abreast of the latest clinical updates, primary care clinicians are
also reminded to care for patients holistically. This involves considering how multimorbidity
may affect treatment priorities, giving advice on health promotion and preventive aspects of
care, and working with patients on individualised care plans to maximise each person’s health.
Primary care clinicians must ensure that claims are appropriate to support to judicious use of
their patients’ MediSave.

6.
We wish to thank healthcare professionals for your dedication and hard work in caring
for patients with chronic conditions, and hope you will find this Handbook useful.




PROFESSOR KENNETH MAK
DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH
MINISTRY OF HEALTH
NOVEMBER 2024

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CHAPTER ONE:
CHRONIC DISEASE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME (CDMP) AND COMMUNITY
HEALTH ASSIST SCHEME (CHAS)

Overview

1.1
MediSave for Chronic Disease Management Programme (CDMP)

1.1.1 The CDMP was introduced in 2006 and provides the option for patients to draw on
their MediSave to help reduce out-of-pocket payments for outpatient treatment
required in the management of their chronic diseases.

1.2
Community Health Assist Scheme (CHAS)

1.2.1 CHAS, formerly known as the Primary Care Partnership Scheme (PCPS), was
introduced in Jan 2012 to enable lower- to middle-income Singapore Citizens to
receive subsidies for medical and dental care at CHAS General Practitioner (GP) and
dental clinics.

1.2.2 Since its introduction, chronic conditions under CHAS Chronic and CDMP have been
aligned, allowing CHAS to complement CDMP. Eligible patients with selected chronic
conditions are thus able to enjoy CHAS subsidies, as well as tap on their MediSave for
the outpatient treatment of their chronic conditions.

1.2.3 The Pioneer Generation Package (PGP) was introduced in Sep 2014 to allow all
Pioneers to receive special subsidies under CHAS. In Nov 2019, CHAS was enhanced to
cover all Singaporeans with selected chronic conditions, regardless of their income. In
addition, the Merdeka Generation Package (MGP) was introduced to provide special
subsidies under CHAS to the Merdeka Generation (MG).

1.3
Healthier SG

1.3.1 In July 2023, Healthier SG was launched to foster stronger relationships between
family doctors and residents, with an aim to optimise chronic disease management
and further encourage the uptake of preventive health measures. Healthier SG also
facilitates an increased involvement of patients and community providers in efforts
towards achieving healthier habits and lifestyle choices.

1.4
Covered Conditions

1.4.1 Treatment of chronic diseases is costly when administered collectively over a long
period. CDMP/CHAS will help to reduce out-of-pocket payments and reduce barriers
for patients to seek medical treatment. With the inclusion of more chronic conditions
under CDMP/CHAS, GPs will be able to take on a greater role in the management of
their patients’ chronic diseases.

1.4.2 The use of CDMP/CHAS will apply to the conditions listed below in Table 1.1:

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Table 1.1: Chronic Conditions under CDMP/CHAS

Conditions under CDMP/CHAS
Chronic Conditions with
data submission
requirements
(Requiring the reporting of clinical
indicators as detailed in Chapter
Four: Capture and Submission of
Clinical Data)
1) Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-Diabetes
2) Hypertension
3) Lipid Disorders
4) Asthma
5) Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
6) Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)

CDMP-Mental Illnesses
(Requiring participation of
clinics/doctors in the Mental
Health GP Partnership
Programme)
7) Anxiety Disorders
8) Major Depressive Disorder
9) Bipolar Disorder
10) Schizophrenia

Other Chronic Conditions
11) Stroke
12) Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)
13) Osteoarthritis
14) Parkinson’s Disease
15) Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
16) Epilepsy
17) Osteoporosis
18) Psoriasis
19) Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
20) Ischaemic Heart Disease (IHD)
21) Allergic Rhinitis
22) Gout
23) Chronic Hepatitis B

Clinical Guidelines and Clinical Data Submission

2.1
Participating clinics/medical institutions are required to provide care to patients in line
with the latest MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPGs)1, ACE Clinical Guidances (ACGs)2,
Healthier SG care protocols, and/or best available evidence-based practice, as well as
track and submit clinical data to monitor and improve patient outcomes.
2.2
Proper and conscientious clinical data submission is a key tool to assess the
effectiveness and appropriateness of patients’ management plans at both the individual
and population level. While participating clinics/medical institutions are required to
submit clinical indicators, clinical data submission is needed for only six of the
conditions under CDMP/CHAS and these are largely aligned to Healthier SG data
submission requirements. For the other conditions, recommended care components
outlined in this handbook are expected to be documented and may be subjected to
audits.


1 MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless otherwise
specified in individual guidelines. Users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines are only as current
as the evidence that supports them and new evidence can supersede recommendations made in the
guidelines.
2 ACGs are available at https://www.ace-hta.gov.sg/healthcare-professionals/ace-clinical-guidances-(acgs).

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
2.3
Please refer to Chapter Three: The Clinical Guidelines for further details on the
recommended care components, indications for referral, and specific examples of
claimable/non-claimable items. These are recommended by subject-matter-experts
based on best available medical evidence. The lists of reportable and non-reportable
clinical indicators are detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and Submission of Clinical Data.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CHAPTER TWO:
REGISTRATION AND MEDISAVE USE

1.
Policy on MediSave Use

1.1. The primary purpose of MediSave is to help Singaporeans afford costly hospitalisation
bills. For chronic conditions, early detection and good management help patients avoid
subsequent costly hospitalisations. To bring about better health outcomes, MOH has
allowed MediSave to cover selected chronic conditions in the outpatient setting.

1.2. To ensure prudent use of MediSave funds, two safeguards are in place under the CDMP:

a)
Co-payment: A co-payment of 15% will apply to each outpatient CDMP bill;
and
b)
Annual withdrawal limit: An annual withdrawal limit of $500/700 per patient
applies. This will be reset on 1 January of each year.

Example:
For a CDMP bill of $100, the patient pays $15 out-of-pocket. The remaining
$85 can be claimed from MediSave.


1.3
From 1 Feb 2024, patients seeking CDMP treatment at their enrolled Healthier SG clinics
will have the 15% co-payment waived. They can use MediSave to fully pay for their
CDMP bills, up to the relevant annual limits under the MediSave 500/700 scheme.

1.4
Only doctors and clinics/medical institutions which are accredited for MediSave use can
make MediSave claims for patients. To make claims for Mental Illnesses (i.e.
schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorders), GPs
additionally need to participate in the Mental Health GP Partnership Programme
(MHGPP) and attend the CDMP-MI training provided under MHGPP3. Doctors who are
registered specialists in psychiatry do not need to join MHGPP and are exempted from
CDMP-MI training. GPs are exempted from having to attend CDMP-MI training (but are
still required to take part in MHGPP) if they have the following qualifications/
background4:

a)
Doctors with MMed(FM), GDFM or on the Register of Family Physicians, if the
mental health training modules of these programmes include all the conditions
in CDMP Mental Illnesses.
b)
Doctors with Family Medicine (FM) training who had 3 months posting at
psychiatric departments at the various Restructured Hospitals from May 2007;
c)
Doctors who had 6 months posting at psychiatric departments at the various
Restructured Hospitals from May 2007; OR
d)
Holders of the Graduate Diploma in Mental Health.


3 The MHGPP is meant to provide specialised support (e.g. from psychiatrists and mental health trained nurses,
as well as supply of drugs for mental illness) to primary care doctors and ensure that they have sufficient training
and confidence in treating patients with mental health conditions.
4 GPs are to refer to latest MOH circulars on any changes to these criteria.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
2.
Registration Process for MediSave for CDMP

2.1. Clinics Intending to Participate in the CDMP

2.1.1. Only the clinic/medical institution and its doctor(s) accredited under the MediSave
Scheme may submit CDMP claims and make MediSave claims on behalf of their patients.

2.1.2. An outline of the registration and accreditation process is provided in Table 2.1.

Table 2.1: Registration and Accreditation Process (MediSave for CDMP)
Steps

Clinics submit E-Application form to MOH/Doctors submit E-Application form to MOH (concurrently) via
https://fsae.moh.gov.sg
↓
•
Clinic representative(s) register(s) and complete(s) online e-learning courses
•
Clinics submit documents to CPF Board
↓
MOH approves the participation of the clinics
↓







Clinics to endorse CPF
Board’s Terms and
Conditions

MOH notifies clinics the
approval via system
generated emails









↓


Effective start date of participation in the CDMP by clinics

2.2
Registration of Clinic/Medical Institution with MOH


2.2.1 To join the CDMP, clinics/medical institutions will need to fulfil the following criteria,
including but not limited to:

a)
Have a valid licence under the Healthcare Services Act 2020 (as applicable) to
carry out the procedures and treatments to be claimed under MediSave
scheme;
b)
Complete the necessary e-learning modules;
c)
The applicant, the person(s) indicated as the licensee, any person(s) having
management or control of the clinics/medical institution is not in breach or
suspected to be in breach of (i) the terms and conditions of any public scheme
administered by the Government or its appointed agents, including  public
schemes administered by MOH; (ii) any health service licensing legislation and
regulations, including the Medical Registration Act (Cap. 174) or the Dental
Registration Act (Cap. 76); and/or (iii) all applicable laws and legislation
(including the CPF Act, the Medisave Accounts Withdrawal Regulations, and
MediShield Life Scheme Regulations), and all prevailing relevant guidelines and
requirements issued or imposed by MOH, including and not limited to the
guidelines and requirements in the MediSave Manual and circulars;

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
d)
The applicant, licensee(s), and persons employed by the Applicant have a
satisfactory track record under any applicable legislation or MOH healthcare
financing or assistance schemes, including but not limited to (i) whether the
applicant, licensee(s), and/or clinic manager owe any monies to the
Government and/or have not completed their remedial actions for breaches
in relation to any Government healthcare financing or assistance schemes; (ii)
whether the applicant, licensee(s), and/or clinic manager was/is suspended or
terminated from any Government healthcare financing or assistance schemes,
whether in the past or present; (iv) whether applicant, licensee(s) and/or clinic
manager has been convicted of or is subject of ongoing criminal or disciplinary
investigations or proceedings;
e)
The applicant, licensee(s), and/or clinic manager had no involvement or
suspected involvement in the following, whether past or present: (i) conviction
of an offence, or found by the relevant professional board (Singapore Medical
Council or Singapore Dental Council) to be guilty of misconduct involving
dishonesty or fraud; (ii) suspended or struck off the register maintained by the
SMC or the SDC; (iii) engaged or engaging in over-servicing or over-charging his
patients (as determined by the Government in its sole discretion); and/or (iv)
convicted of or subject of ongoing investigation  by the Government and/or
other relevant authorities relating to the MediSave and MediShield Life
Scheme, dishonesty and/or fraud;
f)
Be able to submit clinical data for patients through the CIDC Online portal5, or
selected Clinic Management Systems (CMS) with SmartCMS services6; and
g)
CEO/Director-level officer to accept CPF Board’s Terms and Conditions via
FormSG

2.2.2 To make claims for patients through the online MOH claims system(s)7 , clinics/medical
institutions need to have:

a)
A CorpPass account;
b)
A Personal Computer/Laptop with the following configuration:MediClaim:
(i)
Minimum 1 gigahertz (GHz) or faster processor
(ii)
4GB or above Memory (RAM)
(iii) 10GB of free space in HDD
(iv) Operating System Windows 10
(v)
Browser Internet Explorer 11
(vi) Internet connection
NPHC:
(i)
Processor: Intel i5 or AMD equivalent
(ii)
8GB or above Memory RAM
(iii) Internet Connection

5 The CIDC Online Portal can be accessed at https://cidc.moh.gov.sg/cidcweb/CorpPass/CorpPassLogin.aspx
6 Clinic Management Systems (CMSes) offering smartCMS services can be found on
https://www.synapxe.sg/partner-us/smartcms
7 Claims system – National Platform for Healthcare Claims (NPHC) - will take over MediClaim in Nov 2024.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
(iv) Google Chrome 121 and above, Microsoft Edge 121 and above, Safari
16 and 17
c)
GIRO arrangement with CPF Board for MediSave payments to be credited into
the clinic/medical institution’s bank account; and

2.2.3 To make claims for patients through the online MHCP system, clinics/medical
institutions need to have:

a) A CorpPass account
b) A Personal Computer/Laptop with the following configuration:
(i)
1 gigahertz (GHz) or faster processor,
(ii)
4GB RAM or above,
(iii)
10GB of free space in HDD,
(iv)
1366 x 768 display resolution for optimum viewing,
(v)
10 Mbps Internet bandwidth,
(vi)
Browser Internet Explorer 10.0 or above (Chrome, Firefox and Safari
browsers are also supported),
(vii) Adobe Acrobat Reader,
(viii) Microsoft Excel 2007 and above, and
(ix)
Internet connection;
c)
GIRO arrangement with CPF Board for MediSave payments to be credited into
the clinic/medical institution’s bank account; and

2.2.4 Clinics/medical institutions interested in joining the CDMP will need to submit the
following forms :

a)
E-Application for Clinics to Participate in the MediSave for CDMP via
https://fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/Overview.aspx ;
b)
Direct Debit Authorisation Form (DDA) – Pay MediSave Refunds, Interest and
Fees (by CPF Board); and
c)
Direct Debit Authorisation Form (DDA) – Pay Financial Penalty/Interest (by CPF
Board);

The E-Application website can be accessed via: https://fsae.moh.gov.sg

2.2.5
Clinic/medical institution representative(s) who will be making MediSave claims are
required to register for online e-learning courses on MediSave claims process,
MediSave use guidelines and use of the MOH claims system(s).

The E-Learning application website can be accessed via:
https://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/OverviewTraining.aspx

2.2.6 Clinics/medical institutions participating in the CDMP will be subjected to:

a)
Clinical quality checks conducted by MOH and/or its appointed auditors on
patients who make MediSave claims through the clinics/medical institutions;
b)
Professional medical audits conducted by MOH and/or its appointed auditors
on MediSave claims and clinical indicators submitted; and/or

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
c)
Operational audits conducted by CPF Board and/or its appointed auditors on
MediSave claims.

2.3
Registration of Doctor with MOH

2.3.1 Doctors practising at accredited clinics/medical institutions need to be accredited
under MediSave Scheme and/or MediShield Life Scheme under MOH to participate in
the CDMP before they can make MediSave claims for their patients. They need to hold
a valid practising certificate issued by Singapore Medical Council. The approval is
subject to their compliance with the Terms and Conditions of Approval under
MediSave Scheme, and MediShield Life Scheme, all applicable laws and legislation, the
guidelines and requirements in the MediSave Manual, relevant circulars or any forms
of communication that may be issued or imposed by MOH in relation to MediSave
and/or MediShield Life Scheme(s), and any conditions issued or imposed by MOH for
specific cases.

2.3.2 Interested doctors can submit an E-Application to participate in the CDMP. The
website
is:
https://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/DoctorApplication.aspx.
Registration for MediSave accreditation of doctors is on a 2-year renewal basis,
subject to MOH’s prevailing guidelines and requirements.

2.3.3 Registered doctors will be audited by MOH, CPF Board and/or its appointed auditors
on the clinical indicators and MediSave claims of their patients.

Process of Making a MediSave Claim

A typical process of making a MediSave claim for a patient is described below:

3.1
What to convey to patient or immediate family members who wish to use MediSave:

a)
The treatment components
b)
The cost of treatment
c)
Estimated amount that can be claimed from MediSave, and
d)
Out-of-pocket cash payment that the patient needs to make

3.2
Administrative Procedure:

a)
Each MediSave account holder will need to sign a Medical Claims Authorisation
Form (MCAF) to authorise the CPF Board to deduct his/her MediSave funds for
the treatment of the patient. The relevant fields8 in the MCAF should be
properly filled. The authorisation can be made on a per treatment basis or over
a period of time9. Authorisations over a period of time will stand until revoked
in writing.

8 Under section C of the MCAF form, patients/payers should indicate “Y” for Approved chronic diseases,
vaccination and screenings
9 Authorisation can be for a period of 3, 6 or 12 months, or for an open-ended length of time subject to
revocation in writing.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
b)
Clinic/medical institution staff should ensure that the particulars stated on the
form match those stated in the NRIC or identification document provided.
Clinic/medical institution staff should also verify relationships declared, where
possible.
c)
The clinic/medical institution’s staff should ensure that the patient and
additional MediSave payer(s) understand and acknowledge the relevant
paragraphs in the form.
d)
A witness has to verify that the patient and additional MediSave payer(s) have
completed and signed the form. The witness must be a Singapore Citizen or
Permanent Resident aged 21 years and above and must not lack mental
capacity. Where the institution’s staff is acting as a witness, the SC/PR and age
requirements are lifted.
e)
Clinics/medical institutions are to submit the MediSave claims electronically to
CPF Board for processing via the MOH claims system(s).

3.3
If the patient is deemed to be mentally incapacitated (see definition of mentally
incapacitated person below), his donee/deputy or immediate family members would
need to authorise the use of the patient’s own MediSave. The doctor in charge would
need to certify on the relevant part of the form that the patient is mentally
incapacitated.

A mentally incapacitated person is defined as a person who either:

a)
has a medical report from a psychiatrist declaring that the patient is
permanently mentally incapacitated; or
b)
is determined by a doctor, at the material time, to be unable to decide for
himself.  An inability to decide is when a patient is unable to:
(i) Understand the information relevant to the decision;
(ii) Retain that information relevant to the decision;
(iii) Use or weigh that information as part of the decision-making process;
and
(iv) Communicate his decision (by any means).

3.4
Payment will be made daily to MediSave-accredited clinics/medical institutions via
InterBank Giro (IBG) on the 3rd working day after the approval date of the MediSave
claims.

Where a clinic/medical institution has made an over-claim or unauthorised deduction
from MediSave, it will have to refund the amount deducted to the MediSave account.  The
clinic/medical institution will have to pay the interest lost by individuals if it is the
clinic’s/medical institution's error.  The interest will be computed at the prevailing CPF
interest at the time of the adjustment.

3.5
Clinics submit MediSave claims electronically.

Audit

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
4.1
All MediSave claims and clinical indicators for CDMP conditions submitted by the
participating clinic/medical institution may be subjected to regular audit by the CPF
Board, the Ministry of Health and/or its appointed auditors. There are 2 types of audits
for MediSave claims:

a)
Operational audit: This audit looks at the operational aspect of making
MediSave claims such as proper documentation and completion of the MCAF;
b)
Professional audit: This audit looks at treatments and investigations
administered for each MediSave claim to determine if it is related to the
diagnosis, whether reportable clinical indicator data was submitted, and the
accuracy of clinical indicator data submitted.

4.2
Prior notice will be given to identify the cases to be audited. The following documents
may be required for the audit:

a)
Hard copies of Claim Forms and Clinical Indicator Reports submitted
electronically,
b)
Medical Claims Authorisation Forms,
c)
Itemised bills/Payment records (detailing consultation charges, individual drug
charges, DRP, nursing charges, other services),
d)
Photocopies of identification papers (where necessary),
e)
Case records of the patient for the visits which were claimed (details under
para 5.1). For claims on the complications of the approved chronic diseases,
doctors have to document the causal relationship. For packages, please
indicate dates of visits which are claimed,
f)
Investigation/Test reports where available e.g. HbA1c results, lipid results,
g)
Prescription records, and
h)
Evidence supporting diagnosis e.g. documentation in case records or
laboratory reports.

4.3
Routine clinical data submission will only be required for Diabetes Mellitus/Pre-diabetes,
Hypertension, Lipid Disorders, COPD, Asthma, CKD (Nephritis/Nephrosis), unless
otherwise stated via circular. Please note that in cases where the MediSave claim
includes management for complication(s) due to the chronic disease, the doctor would
need to document clearly the causal relationship between the approved chronic
condition and the complication(s) which arose from it.

4.4
Clinics/medical institutions or doctors found guilty of wrong claims (i.e. claims noncompliant to the CDMP Handbook and prevailing guidelines/circulars) will be required
to return the relevant amount to the affected MediSave account(s) with interest. In
addition, the doctor will be issued a warning letter. A doctor who makes non-compliant
claims will be subjected to prevailing enforcement and escalation frameworks as MOH
deems appropriate.

Recommended Standards of Documentation to Support Claims

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
5.1
Clinical records are expected to be accurate, clear, and complete with the following
information to support claims under CDMP:
a)
Key findings from focused history taking and physical examination, which
should include the patient’s chief complaint (if any), and reflect diagnoses of
current acute and/or chronic medical issues
b)
Indicated laboratory and/or radiological investigations, if any, to assist in
diagnosis and/or management
c)
Diagnoses and/or problem list
d)
Treatment plan
e)
Recommended care components as elaborated on in Chapter Three:  The
Clinical Guidelines

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

CHAPTER THREE:
THE CLINICAL GUIDELINES

Guidelines for Participating Clinics and Practitioners

1.1
Clinics participating in the CDMP/CHAS are expected to provide the recommended
care components detailed in this handbook as appropriate to the individual patient’s
clinical needs. The basis for establishing a diagnosis of the chronic diseases should
conform to the prevailing MOH CPGs, ACGs and best available evidence-based
practice, where applicable.

1.2
The recommended care components of each condition are recommended by the
Clinical Advisory Committee appointed by MOH and are based on current available
evidence. They can be found in Chapter Three: The Clinical Guidelines of this
handbook.

1.3
In general, the management of metabolic risk factors and lifestyle advice such as
smoking cessation are relevant to many CDMP conditions. While these may not be
explicitly specified as a recommended care component under the specified disease
section, it is advised that each individual’s chronic care needs are considered in a
holistic manner, and management of metabolic risk factors carried out where
indicated.

1.4
To facilitate integration of care across the various settings so that patients continue to
receive appropriate management of their chronic conditions, MOH has worked with
the relevant specialists to develop continuing care guidelines:

a)
To identify suitable patients who are stable and can be managed in the
community by their primary care physician rather than in a tertiary setting;
or
b)
To identify patients who are at risk and may benefit from specialist opinion.

1.5
The diagnosis of all chronic conditions must be clearly documented in the clinical
notes.  For avoidance of doubt, causal relationship of claims related to complications
of approved CDMP conditions must be documented.

1.6
Clinics and practitioners under CDMP are reminded to comply with the prevailing
standards in the Healthcare Services (Advertisement) Regulations, including not
providing information to the public to solicit or encourage the use of the services
provided by or at any healthcare institution.

Mental Health GP Partnership Programme (MHGPP) for CDMP Mental Illnesses
(CDMP-MI)

2.1
Mental health conditions, i.e. Schizophrenia, Major Depression, Bipolar Disorder and
Anxiety, are included in the CDMP-MI. GPs  making CDMP/CHAS claims for the abovementioned conditions are required to participate in the Mental Health GP Partnership

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Programme (MHGPP) and attend the CDMP-MI training provided under the MHGPP
to ensure that they have sufficient training and confidence in treating patients with
mental health conditions.

2.2
In addition to access to CDMP/CHAS for mental health conditions, GPs are supported
with the following by participating in MHGPP:
a)
Psychiatric drugs at a lower cost
b)
Community mental health services, such as case management and counselling
c)
Direct access to specialist(s) assigned by Restructured Hospitals (RHs) to assist
GPs with clinical consults

2.3
A liaison coordinator will facilitate GPs’ patients' referrals between the clinic, hospital
and community support services. In addition, continuing medical education (CME)
talks and case discussion platforms are also regularly organised to enhance GPs’
competencies in the latest treatment modalities of mental health care.

2.4
Doctors who are registered specialists in psychiatry do not need to join MHGPP and
are exempted from CDMP-MI training. More details on the requirements for MHGPP
are under para 1.4 of Chapter Two: Registration and MediSave Use.

2.5
For new diagnosis of mental health conditions, when in doubt, it is advisable to refer
to a psychiatrist, as the diagnosis may carry medical, social and/or legal implications.

2.6
Since 1 Jan 2014, Dementia is no longer a CDMP-MI condition. Therefore, doctors who
wish to manage Dementia patients under CDMP/CHAS are no longer required to
participate in the MHGPP. For any patient with suspected Dementia or cognitive
impairment, when in doubt, it is advisable to refer the patient to a
geriatrician/psychiatrist/neurologist for confirmation as the diagnosis may carry
medical, social and/or legal implications.

Guidelines on MediSave Use for CDMP

3.1
Only doctors and clinics/medical institutions which are accredited for MediSave use
and participating in the CDMP can make MediSave claims. Doctors and participating
clinics/medical institutions on the CDMP have to comply with the relevant guidelines.

3.2
MediSave use is only allowed for outpatient treatments of the approved chronic
conditions in Table 1.1 and/or its associated complications. Clinics must indicate the
relevant MediSave Scheme or Diagnosis of patients in the Medical Claims
Authorisation Form when they make MediSave claims.

3.3
MediSave claims will be accepted only if:

a)
The patient is diagnosed with an approved chronic condition(s) listed in Table
1.1;

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
b)
The claim must be related to the treatment of the condition and its
complications. The doctor in-charge must clearly document this causal
relationship or link between the condition and its treatment;
c)
In this regard, MediSave claims will generally not be allowed for sleeping pills,
slimming pills or erectile dysfunction drugs used for lifestyle purposes;
d)
Under certain equivocal circumstances, the auditors will seek further
clarification with the prescribing doctor and decide on acceptance of claim on a
case-by-case basis;
e)
There are accurate, clear and complete clinical notes and supporting documents
(e.g. referrals, memos, prescriptions or medications from other institutions) to
substantiate claims under CDMP. Recommended care components are expected
to be documented in the doctor’s clinical notes. Audits may call for clinical notes,
supporting documents and recommended care components to be submitted at
random. Guidelines on the recommended standards of documentation are
elaborated in Chapter Two, Section 5: “Recommended Standards of
Documentation to Support Claims”.
f)
The patient is regularly managed by the participating clinic/doctor for the
approved chronic condition(s) (generally, consultations should be performed at
least once every 6 months).

3.4
Certain items including non-evidence-based treatments are not MediSave-claimable.
This is to ensure that patients’ MediSave dollars are judiciously used to cover
recommended care components and medications. A general list (not exhaustive) of
claimable and non-claimable items is included in Table 3.1 below for reference.


Table 3.1: General List of Claimable and Non-Claimable Items/Services
Claimable                                                                  Not Claimable
✓ Consultations and services related to the
management of the approved chronic
conditions and their associated
complications10, delivered in the
following manner:
• On premise at participating
healthcare institutions
• Via video and phone
consultations by the healthcare
team (e.g., doctors, nurses)
• At patient’s home (by MOHsubvented homecare providers)
• Repeat prescriptions without
consultation
 Consultations unrelated to the
diagnosis/management of the approved
chronic conditions or their complications
 Other forms of telehealth services or
video and phone consultations unless
otherwise stated in relevant MOH
circulars
 Home-based services provided by nonMOH-subvented homecare providers.

10 Examples of this include the follow-up management of post-total knee replacement (osteoarthritis), post-renal
transplant (chronic kidney disease) and post-bariatric surgery (management of obesity as a risk factor for
relevant CDMP conditions e.g. diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, chronic kidney disease,
ischemic heart disease, stroke and/or osteoarthritis).

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Table 3.1: General List of Claimable and Non-Claimable Items/Services
Claimable                                                                  Not Claimable
✓ Relevant investigations (laboratory and
radiological) leading to the positive
diagnosis11 of approved chronic
conditions or for management of the
condition and/or their complications
✓ Investigations for good prescribing
practice to avoid drug-related
complications
 Investigations unrelated to the positive
diagnosis or management of the
approved chronic conditions or their
complications
 Medical examination to meet statutory
requirements and/or for administrative
purposes (e.g., pre-employment,
insurance, driving licence application)
 Laboratory test packages which include
investigations unrelated to the positive
diagnosis or management of the
approved chronic conditions or their
complications

 Asymptomatic health screening and
review of screening results outside of
SFL e.g., STD screening, Tumour markers
 Investigations without corresponding
evidence that they were conducted e.g.,
laboratory test reports or results
recorded in the case notes, or invoice
from laboratory

11 This refers only to investigations that definitively establish the diagnosis of a CDMP condition, where such a
definitive test is available for the condition, namely: (a) HbA1c, random plasma glucose, fasting plasma glucose
and/or 2-hour 75g oral glucose tolerance test for diabetes mellitus; (b) lipid profile for lipid disorders (including
use of a non-fasting lipid profile as an alternative initial screening test); (c) formal spirometry/pulmonary
function test for asthma and COPD; (d) Kidney Function and/or urine protein- or albumin-creatinine ratio for
CKD; (e) CT/MRI Brain for stroke; (f) DXA scan of hip and spine for osteoporosis; and (g) electrocardiogram, stress
test, transthoracic echocardiography, and/or cardiac CT angiogram for IHD. Investigations that are not definitive
for the diagnosis, and/or used to rule out differential diagnoses, are not claimable.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Table 3.1: General List of Claimable and Non-Claimable Items/Services
Claimable                                                                  Not Claimable
✓ Medications for the management of
approved chronic conditions, their
complications (e.g., gastro-protectants
when prescribed with Non-Steroidal AntiInflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs), weight-loss
medications for obese patients if
clinically indicated based on prevailing
local guidelines for the relevant CMDP
conditions), and/or their risk factors (e.g.,
nicotine replacement therapy for
smoking cessation)

 Medications unrelated to the
diagnosis/management of the approved
chronic conditions or their complications
 Traditional or complementary medicine
(e.g., massage therapy, chiropractic,
homeopathy, acupuncture, herbal
medicine, Ayurveda)
 Health supplements, dietary
supplements and vitamins (except for
cases with established deficiencies12)
 Sedatives-hypnotics (e.g.,
Benzodiazepines, zolpidem, zopiclone)13
 Lifestyle-modifying medications (e.g.,
hair-loss or weight-loss medications))
 Excessive quantities of medications (i.e.,
more than medically necessary and/or
exceeding recommended prescribing
limits according to available clinical
guidelines)
 Non-HSA registered medications
 Off-label use of medications
 Moisturisers, except where (i) clinically
indicated based on the latest CPGs or
ACGs issued by MOH, and/or best
available evidence-based practice; (ii)
prescribed by a doctor; and (iii) are on
the MOH List of Subsidised Drugs

12 In the absence of laboratory tests to definitively diagnose clinical deficiency, other supporting documented
evidence (e.g. patient history, physical exam and/or other lab tests) can be accepted to support the clinical
diagnosis of deficiency.
13 It is recommended that other medications with addictive potential should be prescribed according to the
latest national guidelines (e.g. National Guidelines for the Safe Prescribing of Opioids 2021 (First Edition)).

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Table 3.1: General List of Claimable and Non-Claimable Items/Services
Claimable                                                                  Not Claimable

 Topical creams, except (i) Prescription
Only Medicines as classified by HSA; (ii)
where clearly indicated in the treatment
notes; and (iii) where clinically indicated
based on the latest CPGs or ACGs issued
by MOH, and/or best available evidencebased practice
 Vaccinations not listed as a
recommended care component of a
CDMP chronic condition
 Medications delivered/collected on a
patient’s behalf which do not meet the
requirements detailed in MOH Circular
No. 222/2020 or 223/202014
✓ Consumables for the purposes of
drug/treatment administration as part of
care delivery, for the management of
approved chronic conditions and/or their
complication(s), which are delivered at
participating healthcare institutions15
(e.g.  customised and prefabricated
customised insoles or orthoses for
relevant CDMP conditions and
personalised by a podiatrist during care
delivery, at up to two pairs per patient
per year)
 Consumables or dressing products for
home use (i.e., not part of care delivery at
the participating healthcare institution),
unless otherwise stated in the CDMP
handbook
✓ Nursing, pharmacists, and allied health
services as referred by physicians in
accordance with patients’ management
plans, and which fulfil the criteria in para
3.5.

 Rental/purchase of medical devices, such
as blood pressure monitoring machines,
splints, nasogastric tubes and ambulatory
devices (e.g. walking sticks, wheelchairs),
unless otherwise stated in the CDMP
handbook in relevant MOH circulars
 Non-healthcare services (e.g. cooking
courses, gym classes)

14 Circulars can be found on mohalert.moh.gov.sg
15 Only for approved consumables collected at the outpatient dispensary. The MCR number of ordering doctor
(if ordered by the doctor) and other requisite information for Medisave claims (e.g. diagnosis, visit date) need
to be documented. Patient’s case notes/records must indicate that the patient meets the criteria to claim for
the specific consumables and the total quantity claimed for. Approved consumables can only be claimed if: (i)
the approved consumable is listed on a prescription indicated for CDMP claim (i.e. CDMP prescription), and the
patient is verified to have the associated CDMP condition; or (ii) the approved consumable is not listed on a
CDMP prescription but the patient requests for it when filling out the CDMP prescription for the associated
CDMP condition. For such situations, pharmacists may add on approved consumables related to the CDMP
prescription for MediSave claim, even if they are not listed in the prescription.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Table 3.1: General List of Claimable and Non-Claimable Items/Services
Claimable                                                                  Not Claimable
 Home meal delivery, transport
 Employment of caregiver or nursing aide,
and all related costs
More disease-specific examples of claimable and non-claimable items/services can be found in the DiseaseSpecific Clinical Guidelines.

3.5
Support services should meet the following criteria for them to be claimable. A general
but non-exhaustive list of claimable and non-claimable support services is included in
Table 3.2 below for reference.

a) The support service should be widely regarded as a mainstream healthcare or
support service;
b) There is evidence of the support service being effective in contributing to the
positive management of the chronic disease concerned;
c) The support service should be delivered by qualified personnel, or where relevant,
an accredited professional16; and
d) The support service provided should be within the scope of practice empowered
under the relevant professional registration Act (if relevant), or otherwise
generally accepted for the professional based on his/her professional
qualifications.

Table 3.2: Examples of Claimable and Non-Claimable Support Services
Claimable
✓ Nursing and related services delivered by registered nurses
o Including nursing care (e.g. diabetic foot wound care, nasogastric tube care),
nurse counselling
✓ Pharmacist services (if ordered/referred by the attending doctor)
o Including medication review and reconciliation, pill boxing services
✓ Allied health services
o Therapy services, including physiotherapy, occupational therapy, speech
therapy services delivered by registered Allied Health Professionals (AHPs)
o Services by non-registered professions specified in the Allied Health Professions
Act, including podiatry, dietetics, psychotherapy, prosthetics, orthotics
✓ Other key support services for chronic disease care
o Including diabetic retinal photography, diabetic foot screening, smoking
cessation
Not Claimable
 Stress management
 Sleep management
 Commercial weight management programmes / exercise support (e.g. gym classes)
 Health coaching
 Cooking courses


16  Accredited professionals include doctors, dentists, nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists, occupational
therapists, speech therapists, diagnostic radiographers, radiation therapists, optometrists and opticians.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
3.6
The
maximum
amount
that
can
be
withdrawn
for
chronic
disease
treatments/attendances under MediSave500/700 limit is $500 per patient per calendar
year for patients with simple chronic conditions, and $700 per patient per calendar year
for patients with complex chronic conditions (refer to Table 3.3 below).

Table 3.3: Simple Chronic and Complex Chronic Patients under CDMP
Patient
Status
Description
Withdrawal Limit
Complex
Chronic
Patients who have:
(a) Received treatment for two or more CDMP
conditions in a visit; or
(b) Received treatment for at least one CDMP condition
with a recognised complication (Please refer to MOH
Circulars for the latest list of recognised complications.)
$700 per year


Simple
Chronic
Any other CDMP patient who does not meet the criteria
above
$500 per year

3.7
Eligible patients can use their personal MediSave account and approved family
members’ MediSave accounts for payment of their chronic disease treatments under
CDMP limits, up to the patient’s annual withdrawal limit. Approved family members
include the spouse, parent, or child of the patient. Patients who are Singapore Citizens
or Permanent Residents will also be able to use their siblings’ and grandchildren’s
MediSave accounts to pay for their treatment.

3.8
Eligible patients who are aged 60 and above can also use an additional $300 under the
Flexi-MediSave scheme, for the treatment of their chronic disease. This withdrawal can
be made from their MediSave and spouse’s MediSave (if the spouse is also aged 60 and
above).

3.9
See Scenario 1 for an illustration of how patients could tap on MediSave to pay for
chronic disease treatments:

Scenario 1
Mr Raja is a 61-year-old adult with 2 working children. He is suffering from hypertension
without complications and has MediSave from his earlier years of work. Mr Raja can
make use of a maximum of $500 of MediSave for his treatments. He may tap on his own,
his spouse’s or his children’s MediSave accounts to pay for his outpatient treatment for
hypertension, up to the $500 limit (i.e. MediSave500/700 limit for the simple chronic
patients).

If Mr Raja had suffered (a) any recognised complication of hypertension, or (b) two
chronic conditions (e.g. hypertension and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease), then
a $700 limit (i.e. MediSave500/700 limit for the complex chronic patients) would apply
instead.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

3.10 See Scenario 2 for an illustration of how multiple patients could tap on the same
approved family member’s MediSave account to pay for chronic disease treatments
under CDMP limits:


3.11
Patients may have employer benefits and outpatient insurance that can be used to
pay for outpatient treatments. Bills should be paid using employers’ benefits and any
relevant insurance that the patient may have first, before claiming from MediSave for
the balance.

3.12
In cases where only part of the chronic disease outpatient treatment bill is payable by
employer companies and the patient chooses to use MediSave for the balance of the
bill, clinics would:

a)
Follow the current arrangements it has with the employer to seek payment; and
b)
Help patients submit the MediSave claim.

Guidelines on Use of CHAS Subsidy for CDMP Conditions

4.1
Only doctors and clinics participating in CHAS can make CHAS subsidy claims.

4.2
Doctors and participating clinics in CHAS must comply with the guidelines in this
handbook.

4.3
The guidelines in paras 3.1 to 3.5 on Medisave use for CDMP apply to CHAS claims for
CDMP conditions as well.
a)
The CHAS visit limit will be based on the chronic conditions managed during the
visit. The visit limit for complex chronic will apply if more than one chronic
condition or a single chronic condition with related complication was managed
during the visit. Otherwise, the visit limit for simple chronic will apply.
b)
The CHAS annual limit will be based on whether the patient meets the definition
of a Complex Chronic patient  as defined in Table 3.3, during the year.

As he is above 60, he can also tap on the Flexi-MediSave limit to pay for his outpatient
hypertension treatments, up to his annual withdrawal limit. With this, he can use up to
a total of $800 (i.e. the sum of the simple chronic CDMP limit and prevailing FlexiMediSave limit).
Scenario 2
Ms Tan as well as her father, mother, and grandmother all suffer from diabetes without
complications. However, Ms Tan’s parents and grandmother have no MediSave. Ms Tan
can make use of $500 from her MediSave to pay for her own diabetes treatment, as well
as the treatment of each of her 3 elders.

In total, she will be able to utilise up to $2,000 of her MediSave each year for her father,
mother, grandmother and herself.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
4.4
For patients who are eligible for both employment benefits and CHAS, there is no
requirement to apply CHAS subsidies before employer benefits.

DISEASE-SPECIFIC
CLINICAL
GUIDELINES

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals


DISEASE-SPECIFIC
CLINICAL
GUIDELINES

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Disease-Specific Clinical Guidelines for the CDMP Conditions

The Disease-Specific Clinical Guidelines

No.
Condition
Page

Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes

Hypertension

Lipid Disorders

Asthma

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)

Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)

7*
Anxiety

8*
Major Depressive Disorder

9*
Bipolar Disorder

10*
Schizophrenia

Stroke

Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)

Osteoarthritis

Parkinson’s Disease

Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)

Epilepsy

Osteoporosis

Psoriasis

Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)

Ischaemic Heart Disease (IHD)

Allergic Rhinitis

Gout

Chronic Hepatitis B

*Conditions under the CDMP-MI

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
1. Diabetes Mellitus17 and Pre-diabetes
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and
Submission of Clinical Data)

Diabetes mellitus is a heterogeneous metabolic disorder characterised by presence of
hyperglycaemia resulting from defects in insulin production, insulin action, or both. Chronic
hyperglycaemia is associated with long-term sequelae resulting from damage to various
organs and tissues, particularly the kidney, eye, nerves, heart and blood vessels.

Screening for Type 2 Diabetes

The recommended investigations for screening of diabetes in asymptomatic individuals aged
≥ 40 years and/or with risk factors for diabetes are as follows:
1. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
2. HbA1c (not suitable for those with haemoglobinopathy)

If HbA1c is used as the screening test, the following interpretation and follow-up testing is
recommended.

Table 3.4: Interpretation of Screening HbA1c Results and Recommended Follow-up Tests
HbA1c Result
Interpretation and Recommended Follow-up Tests
≤ 6.0%
Low probability of diabetes mellitus

No further tests needed if there are no symptoms of diabetes.

Further testing with an FPG or 2-hr oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
is recommended in the presence of clinical suspicion of diabetes
6.1% to 6.9%
Proceed to conduct FPG or 2-hr OGTT

Refer to section on diagnosing diabetes and pre-diabetes
≥ 7.0%
High probability of diabetes mellitus

No further tests needed for diagnosis of diabetes

Diagnosing Diabetes and Pre-Diabetes Mellitus

In patients with hyperglycemic crisis (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis), diabetes mellitus can be
diagnosed without further testing.

In patients with typical symptoms (e.g. polydipsia, polyuria), diabetes mellitus can be
diagnosed if any one of the following is present.
1. Casual plasma glucose ≥ 11.1 mmol/L
2. FPG ≥ 7.0mmol/L
3. 2-hour post-challenge plasma glucose ≥ 11.1 mmol/L
4. HbA1c ≥ 7.0%

17 Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes mellitus are covered under CDMP/CHAS. Gestational diabetes mellitus is not
covered under CDMP/CHAS.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
In asymptomatic individuals, a repeat test should be done on a subsequent day. For these
individuals, when two different tests are available and the results are above the diagnostic
thresholds, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.

Pre-diabetes is defined by glycaemic levels that are higher than normal, but lower than the
diabetic thresholds. Patients are asymptomatic but the condition puts individuals at higher
risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The pre-diabetic state includes
impaired fasting glucose (IFG) and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), which can be diagnosed
as follows:

Table 3.5: Definition of Pre-diabetes by Glycaemic Levels
Pre-diabetes
Fasting Plasma Glucose (FPG)
(mmol/L)~
2-hr Post-challenge Plasma Glucose
(mmol/L)*
IFG
6.1 – 6.9
< 7.8
IGT
< 7.0
7.8 – 11.0
*2-hour 75g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
~All patients with FPG between 6.1 to 6.9 will require a follow-up 2-hr Post-challenge Plasma Glucose

Part Ia: Recommended Care Components for Diabetes Mellitus
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure Measurement~   Twice a year
For those with hypertension, an acceptable
treatment-initiation and target blood pressure is
generally < 130/80mmHg; Clinicians may
personalise the targets accordingly based on the
patient’s risk factors
Weight and BMI Assessment~
Twice a year
Keep BMI < 23kg/m2 (For Non-Asian population,
keep BMI < 25 kg/m2)
Glycated Haemoglobin
(HbA1c)~
Twice a year
General HbA1c target of ≤ 7.0%, but target of
treatment should be personalised (e.g. for
elderly)
Lipid Profile~
Annually
All patients should be stratified according to
their cardiovascular risk (as recommended in
the Lipids ACG);
Targets of treatment should be personalised by
levels of risk
Kidney Assessment18~
(i) Serum Creatinine (Cr)
and/or eGFR, and
(ii) Urine Albumin-Creatinine
Ratio (uACR) or Urine
Protein-Creatinine Ratio
(uPCR)
Annually

Good glycaemic control and good BP control
with Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE)
inhibitor or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker (ARB)
preferred to slow progression of diabetic
nephropathy.

Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1
RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce
their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes

18 Kidney Assessment includes both kidney function assessment (Serum Cr and/or eGFR) and urinary protein
(uACR/uPCR).

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks

Annual screening of (i) serum Cr and/or eGFR and
(ii) uACR in all patients, or uPCR if significant
levels of proteinuria (as defined in evidencebased practice guidelines)
Eye Assessment~
At least annually
or at appropriate
intervals
thereafter as
recommended by
a healthcare
provider
Includes retinal assessment (e.g. diabetic retinal
photography) and visual acuity
Patients with Type 1 DM:  First assessment within
3-5 years after diagnosis of diabetes once patient
is aged ten years or older, then annually
Patients with Type 2 DM: First assessment at
diagnosis, then annually
Foot Assessment~
At least annually
or at
recommended
intervals based
on risk category
Screen for peripheral neuropathy, peripheral
vascular disease, bone, joint, skin and nail
abnormalities, and poor footwear
Smoking Assessment~
Annually for
smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless
there is a change
in smoking habit
Assessment on smoking habits (estimated
sticks/day; zero for non- or ex-smoker) and
provide smoking cessation counselling where
applicable
Cardiac Assessment
At diagnosis
before initiating
medications
Includes baseline ECG
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)
Pneumococcal Vaccination
(PPSV23 only)#
1 or 2 doses
depending on age
and other
medical
conditions
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
Part Ib: Recommended Care Components for Pre-Diabetes Mellitus
Recommended
Care Components
Minimum Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure
Measurement~
Annually
Clinicians may personalise the treatment target accordingly
based on the patient’s risk factors
Weight and BMI
Assessment~
Twice a year
Keep BMI < 23kg/m2 (For Non-Asian population, keep BMI < 25
kg/m2)
Lipid Profile~
Annually
All patients should be risk stratified (as recommended in the
Lipids ACG);
Targets of treatment should be personalised by levels of risk
Blood Glucose Test
(HbA1c/FPG/ 2-hr
OGTT)~
Twice a year (for
HbA1c/FPG)
Follow up at least 6-monthly FPG with 2-hr OGTT, or HbA1c as
appropriate, and screen for DM

If FPG ≥ 7.0 mmol/L, 2-hr glucose on OGTT ≥ 11.1 mmol/L, or
HbA1c ≥ 7%, proceed to manage as per T2DM

For Pre-DM Patients on metformin:
HbA1c is required for patients on metformin to monitor
treatment response
Kidney Function
Assessment~
(i) Serum Cr and/or
eGFR
Annually (if on
metformin)
For Pre-DM Patients on metformin
Measure kidney function before initiating metformin

Yearly screening of serum Cr and/or eGFR for patients on
metformin; may be done more frequently if there is evidence
of renal impairment

If there is evidence of renal impairment to support a diagnosis
of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), the recommended care
components under CKD should be adhered to
Smoking
Assessment~
Annually for smokers;
Once-off
for
nonsmokers, unless there is
a change in smoking
habit
Assessment on smoking habits (estimated sticks/day; zero for
non- or ex-smoker) and provide smoking cessation counselling
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
Special Patient Population
• Children and adults with suspected Type 1 DM
• Pregnant women or those planning pregnancy who require pre-conception
intensive glycaemic control
• Patients with morbid obesity who are open to the option of intensive weight
management including bariatric surgery

Complications Requiring Active Specialist Management
• Nephrology referral for any of the following:
o Patients with Stage 3b or higher CKD
o Unexpected or rapid decline in renal function
o Difficult management issues (e.g. with high blood pressure or
hyperkalaemia control)
o Atypical features (e.g. haematuria, presence of casts in the urine sediment,
presence of renal bruit, nephrotic range proteinuria (> 3g/day),
• Ophthalmology referral for any of the following:
o Hard exudates/retinal thickening within one-disc diameter of the fovea
(diabetic macular oedema)
o Severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy
o Unexplained eye findings / drop in visual acuity
Early referrals
o Neovascularisation from proliferative diabetic retinopathy
o Pre-retinal and/or vitreous haemorrhage
o Rubeosis iridis (new vessels on the iris)
Urgent referrals
o Sudden loss of vision
o Retinal detachment
o Neovascular glaucoma
• Multidisciplinary diabetic foot clinic 19 (podiatry, orthopaedics surgery, vascular
surgery, neurology) for any of the following:
o Ulceration, gangrene, severe foot infection
o Suspected acute Charcot’s foot
o Vascular claudication
Consider Specialist Input
High Risk Individuals
• Individuals with or at risk for recurrent severe hypoglycaemia*, diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA) or hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) regardless of
HbA1c, for specialist input on personalised targets and medication titration to
reduce such risks
• Patients with difficulty achieving satisfactory control of blood glucose and/or other
risk factors
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician

19 Providers should also refer to the prevailing ACE Clinical Guidance (ACG) on Foot Assessment in People with
Diabetes Mellitus

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
In patients who:
• Can achieve satisfactory HbA1c control and/or for optimisation/management of
glycaemic control
• Can recognise and manage episodes of hypoglycaemia
• Complications of DM are stable/under regular review by the appropriate specialist
*Severe hypoglycaemia refers to hypoglycaemia where assistance from another person is required.

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable20
• Drugs related to the treatment of DM complications, e.g. Ischaemic Heart Disease,
Chronic Kidney Disease, neuropathic pains (e.g. amitriptyline and carbamazepine)
and Peripheral Vascular Diseases (e.g. pentoxifylline)
• Items involved in drug administration, such as insulin pens, insulin pumps, syringes
and needles dispensed in appropriate quantities, necessary for the patient’s own
use
• Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥ 27.5 kg/m2
• Smoking cessation (services and/or medications)
• Lancets and glucose test strips for self-monitoring of blood glucose levels for Type
1 DM patients and Type 2 DM patients on insulin
• Referrals to podiatry for foot care with clearly documented indication for referral
• Custom-made insoles and prefabricated customised insoles or orthoses prescribed
by podiatrists (up to two pairs per patient per year)
Non-Claimable
 Other items involved in disease monitoring, such as lancing devices, glucometers
and blood pressure monitoring equipment, unless otherwise specified via MOH
circular
 Slimming pills if BMI < 27.5kg/m2 and drugs for erectile dysfunction
 Vitamins/supplements except for cases with deficiency e.g. peripheral neuropathy
secondary to metformin-related Vitamin B12 deficiency

References for further information
Pre-diabetes and Diabetes
1. ACE Appropriate Care Guide on Managing pre-diabetes – a growing health concern
(updated July 2021)
2. ACE Clinical Guidance on Type 2 diabetes mellitus — personalising management with
non-insulin medications (17 May 2023)
3. ACE Clinical Guidance on Initiating basal insulin in type 2 diabetes mellitus (updated
10 June 2022)
4. ACE Clinical Guidance on Foot Assessment in Patients with Diabetes Mellitus (8 Aug
2024)
5. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Diabetes Mellitus (July 2014) – MOH Clinical
Practice Guidelines*

20 Providers should also refer to the prevailing ACE Clinical Guidance (ACG) on Managing Pre-diabetes for
recommendations on the care to be provided for pre-diabetics.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Diabetes Mellitus and Pre-diabetes
6. MOH Circular No. 08/2019 on Release of New Screening Test Review Committee
Guidelines, Including Changes to Diabetes Mellitus, Lipid Disorders and Cervical
Cancer Screening (March 2019)
*MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless
otherwise specified in individual guidelines. Users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines
are only as current as the evidence that supports them and new evidence can supersede
recommendations made in the guidelines.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Hypertension

2. Hypertension
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and
Submission of Clinical Data)

Blood Pressure (BP) levels are related to the risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Even within
the normotensive range, people with higher levels of BP have higher rates of CVD.

The diagnosis of hypertension should be based on multiple BP measurements taken on
several separate occasions, as BP may be subjected to spontaneous variations. When the
systolic and diastolic BP fall into different categories, the higher category should apply.

Definitions are given in Table 3.6 for subjects who are not on antihypertensive medication
and not acutely ill.

Table 3.6: Definition and classification of BP levels for adults aged 18 years and older
Category
Systolic BP
Diastolic BP
Normal BP
< 130 mmHg
< 85 mmHg
High-normal BP
130 – 139 mmHg
85 – 89 mmHg
Grade 1 hypertension
140 – 159 mmHg
90 -99 mmHg
Grade 2 hypertension
160 – 179 mmHg
100 – 109 mmHg
Grade 3 hypertension
≥ 180 mmHg
≥ 110 mmHg
Isolated systolic hypertension
≥ 140 mmHg*
< 90 mmHg
*Isolated systolic hypertension is graded according to the same level of systolic BP

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Hypertension

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Hypertension
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure Measurement~
Twice a year

Weight and BMI Assessment~
Twice a year
Keep BMI < 23kg/m2 (For NonAsian population, keep BMI < 25
kg/m2)
Kidney Assessment~
(i) Serum Cr and/or eGFR, and
(ii) Urine Albumin-Creatinine
Ratio (uACR) or ProteinCreatinine Ratio (uPCR)
Annually

If patient also has DM, Angiotensin
Converting Enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker
(ARB)
are
preferred
antihypertensives
to
slow
progression
of
diabetic
nephropathy
Annual screening of (i) serum Cr
and/or eGFR and (ii) uACR in all
patients, or uPCR if significant
levels of proteinuria (as defined in
evidence-based
practice
guidelines)
Smoking Assessment~
Annually for
smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless
there is a change
in smoking habit
Assessment on smoking habits
(estimated sticks/day; zero for
non- or ex-smoker) and provide
smoking cessation counselling
Lipid Profile#
At baseline
All patients should be stratified for
their risk of developing coronary
events (as recommended in the
Lipids ACG)
Targets of treatment should be
personalised by levels of risk
Cardiac Assessment
At diagnosis
before initiating
medications
Includes baseline ECG
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Hypertension

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
• Emergency or urgent treatment indicated e.g. malignant hypertension,
hypertensive cardiac failure or other impending complications
• Hypertension difficult to manage e.g. unusually labile BP, hypertension refractory
to multiple drug regimens (≥ 3)
• Secondary hypertension i.e. hypertension due to an underlying cause, such as
hyperaldosteronism
• Hypertension in special circumstances e.g. pregnancy, young children
• Acute or recent cardiovascular complications from hypertension
Consider Specialist Input
• Young hypertensive patients who are less than 30 years old
• Patients suspected to have secondary causes of hypertension
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• In patients who can achieve satisfactory blood pressure control and/or for
optimisation/management of anti-hypertensive medication

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ For patients with complications of hypertension, such as ischaemic heart disease,
investigations like 2D Echocardiogram, MIBI scans
✓ Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥ 27.5 kg/m2
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
• Purchase of blood pressure monitoring equipment

References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Hypertension - tailoring the management plan to optimise
blood pressure control (15 December 2023)
2. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Hypertension (November 2017) – MOH Clinical
Practice Guidelines*
3. ACE Clinical Guidance on Lipid management:  focus on cardiovascular risk (15 Dec
2023)
4. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Lipids (December 2016) – MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines*
HPB-MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Obesity (June 2016) – MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines*


*MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless
otherwise specified in individual guidelines. Users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines
are only as current as the evidence that supports them and new evidence can supersede
recommendations made in the guidelines.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Lipid Disorders
3. Lipid Disorders
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and
Submission of Clinical Data)

Lipid disorders (dyslipidaemia) play a major role in the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease.
It is a modifiable cardiovascular risk factor that may be inherited or acquired.
Hypercholesterolaemia, mixed (combined) dyslipidaemia and hypertriglyeridaemia are the
three commonest dyslipidaemias.

Lipid disorders can be diagnosed either through a fasting or non-fasting lipid profile, which
should include total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol
(LDL-C) and High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (HDL-C). Fasting lipid profiles instead of nonfasting lipid profiles should be considered whenever there is uncertainty over the potential
validity of the results (e.g. high fat consumption prior to test, borderline TG or LDL-C levels)
especially if pharmacological therapy is being considered.

Common causes of secondary dyslipidaemia should be excluded in any patient presenting
with dyslipidaemia.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Lipid Disorders
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Lipid Profile~
Annually
All patients should be risk stratified (as
recommended in the Lipids ACG)
Targets
of
treatment
should
be
personalised by levels of risk
Smoking Assessment~
Annually for smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless there
is a change in smoking
habit
Assessment
on
smoking
habits
(estimated sticks/day; zero for non- or
ex-smoker)
and
provide
smoking
cessation counselling
Serum transaminases
(ALT/AST)#
Before starting statins
and as clinically
indicated (e.g.
symptoms suggestive
of hepatotoxicity,
increase in statin dose)
Especially when the statin dose is
increased or when combination therapy
is initiated

Stop the statin/fibrate if patient is
symptomatic or if transaminases exceed
3 times the upper limit of normal range
Serum creatine kinase#
Before starting statins
and as clinically
indicated (e.g. muscle
symptoms)
Look out for rapid increase in creatine
kinase post–initiation or increase of
statin or fibrate. Stop the medication if
the CK is three times upper limit of
normal or at about 800 IU/L (whichever
is lower)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Lipid Disorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
Referral to Gastroenterologist
• Pre-treatment transaminases 3 times above normal range
• Clinical presentation of acute hepatitis
• If the ALT/AST is persistently elevated ≥ 3 times upper limit of normal despite
stopping statins
Consider Specialist Input
Consider Referral to Endocrinologist
• Triglyceride level > 4.5mmol/L (400mg/dL) despite dietary changes and maximum
tolerated drug therapy
• Triglyceride level > 10.0 mmol/L (885md/dL)
• Target parameters not achieved despite maximal drug therapy
• Definite or possible familial hypercholesterolemia on Dutch Lipid Clinic Network
criteria or Simon Broome Trust diagnostic criteria (or other validated criteria)
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who are:
• Able to achieve satisfactory lipid control and/or for optimisation/management of
lipid disorder medication

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Drugs related to the treatment of complications of lipid disorders e.g. ischaemic
heart disease and peripheral vascular diseases (e.g. pentoxifylline)
✓ Omega 3 fish oils, only for patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia (e.g. TG >
4.5mmol/L [400mg/dL]) where fibrates alone may not adequately lower the
markedly elevated TG levels
✓ Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥ 27.5
kg/m2
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
• Supplements with no strong evidence for benefit in managing the condition (e.g.
Red yeast supplements (Hypocol) and Co-enzyme Q10)

References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Lipid management: focus on cardiovascular risk (15 Dec
2023)
2. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Lipids (December 2016) – MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines*
3. HPB-MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Obesity (June 2016) – MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines*
4. MOH Circular No. 08/2019 on Release of New Screening Test Review Committee
Guidelines, Including Changes to Diabetes Mellitus, Lipid Disorders and Cervical
Cancer Screening March 2019)*

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Lipid Disorders
*MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless
otherwise specified in individual guidelines. Users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines
are only as current as the evidence that supports them and new evidence can supersede
recommendations made in the guidelines.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Asthma
sorders
4. Asthma
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and
Submission of Clinical Data)

Asthma is a chronic reversible airway disorder that is common in people of all ages. It can be
severe and may progress to be fatal. Asthma may present with recurrent episodic cough,
wheezing,  unexplained dyspnoea, and/or chest tightness, together with variable airflow
limitations that may become permanent over time. Symptoms are often variable in intensity,
duration and type. They tend to be worse at certain times of the day (at night or in the early
mornings) and may be precipitated or aggravated by upper respiratory tract infections,
cigarette smoke, environmental haze, exercise, drugs (e.g. aspirin, NSAIDs, ß-blockers, ACE
inhibitors), pets, and occupational exposure to triggers.

A diagnosis of asthma is based on clinical presentation of characteristic symptoms and where
possible, documentation of variable expiratory airflow limitation.

The following tests can support the diagnosis of asthma:
a) Spirometry: airflow obstruction with/without a positive bronchodilator reversibility
test (defined as an increase in FEV1 or FVC of ≥ 12% AND ≥ 200ml in asthmatics ≥ 12
years old. For children aged 6-11 years old: defined as in increase in FEV1 from
baseline of ≥ 12% predicted.).
b) Excessive variability in twice daily peak expiratory flow (PEF) over 2 weeks (defined as
> 10% in adults or adolescents and > 13% in children aged 6-11 years old).
c) Improvement of PEF by ≥ 20% from baseline after 4 weeks of treatment with antiinflammatory medications (e.g. inhaled corticosteroids) and excluding recent
respiratory infections in the last 28 days.

Initiation of inhaled corticosteroids should not be delayed on the basis of a normal expiratory
airflow test as these tests can be normal in mild or well controlled asthma.

In children < 6 years old, a confident diagnosis of asthma may be challenging as episodic
respiratory symptoms such as wheezing and cough are also common in children without
asthma. A diagnosis of asthma may be based on:
a) Symptom patterns (recurrent episodes of wheeze, cough, breathlessness, and
nocturnal symptoms.
b) Presence of risk factors for development of asthma, such as family history of atopy,
allergic sensitisation, allergy or asthma, or a personal history of food allergy or atopic
dermatitis.
c) Therapeutic response to controller treatment.
d) Exclusion of alternate diagnoses.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Asthma
sorders
Part I: Recommended Care Components for Asthma
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Asthma Control Assessment
(e.g. Global Initiative for
Asthma (GINA) score)~
Twice a year
Asthma symptom control can be assessed
using a composite assessment tool(e.g.
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) score).
An assessment of asthma control is
recommended at every visit, for patients ≥
4 years old . For those < 4 years old, proper
documentation of symptom frequency and
severity
(e.g.
daytime
or
night-time
symptoms, whether symptoms affect the
patient’s sleep, feeding, activities) from
patient’s carer is required
Self-Management Education
(including Written Asthma
Action Plan)#
At diagnosis, and
whenever there is
a change of
medication
•
Check for compliance to treatment and
assess  inhaler technique;
•
Provide education on symptom recognition
and trigger avoidance;
•
Provide and review patient’s Written
Asthma Action Plan at diagnosis and when
there is any change in treatment
Inhaler technique assessment
Smoking Assessment~
Annually for
smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless
there is a change
in smoking habit
•
Assessment on smoking habits (estimated
sticks/day; zero for non- or ex-smoker) and
provide smoking cessation counselling
Spirometry#
At or soon after
diagnosis, or when
clinically indicated
•

Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
•
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)
Pneumococcal Vaccination
(PPSV23 only)#
1 or 2 doses
depending on age
and other medical
conditions
•
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Asthma
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
Confusing or atypical signs and symptoms
• Difficulty confirming asthma diagnosis
• Suspected occupational asthma will require further diagnostic determination of
the industrial trigger agent
• Symptoms suggestive of complications or subtypes of asthma (e.g., allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, eosinophilic asthma)
Difficult to control asthma
• Persistent uncontrolled asthma or frequent exacerbations despite being on
medium to high dose ICS containing treatment or patients who may need biologic
agent
• Uncontrolled asthma with risk factor(s) for poor asthma outcomes (e.g., history of
intubation or admission to ICU because of asthma, low FEV1, over-use of short
acting beta2 agonist (SABA))
• Evidence of significant treatment side effects
Specific patient groups
• Children with poor asthma control and/or frequent urgent care needs
• Pregnant women
• Athletes

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care (continued)
Consider Specialist Input
Co-morbidity
• Concurrent heart failure which may complicate management
• Concurrent active GERD which may mimic asthma
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Require symptom monitoring and optimisation/management of asthma
medications
• Require social support to cope with their disease

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Investigations for management of the disease and complications (e.g. CXR,
pulmonary function tests, allergy tests)
✓ Investigations for good prescribing practice to avoid drug-related complications
✓ Items involved in drug administration, such as spacers necessary for the patient’s
own use
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
 Investigations unrelated to the diagnosis or follow-up of asthma
 Non-evidence-based investigations such as hand-held spirometry

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Asthma
sorders
References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Asthma — optimising long-term management with inhaled
corticosteroid (15 October 2020)
2.  Global Initiative for Asthma. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention,
2024. Updated May 2024.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
sorders
5. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)21
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and
Submission of Clinical Data)

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous disorder characterised by
airflow obstruction that is not fully reversible. The airflow limitation is usually both
progressive and associated with exposure to noxious particles or gases. Smoking is by far the
most important risk factor.

Patients may present with the following symptoms: chronic cough (with or without sputum
production) and breathlessness, wheezing,  and recurrent lower respiratory tract infections.
Acute exacerbations of COPD may require hospitalisation. The prevalence of COPD is highest
after age 50, and is generally higher in men than women.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for COPD
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum Frequency*
Remarks
Weight and BMI
Assessment~
Annually
Nutritional intervention should be
considered in all COPD patients
with
BMI
<
18.5kg/m2
or
significant involuntary weight loss
(> 10% during the last 6 months
or > 5% in the past month)
COPD Assessment Test
(CAT) Score~
Annually

Smoking Assessment~
Annually for smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless there
is a change in smoking
habit
Assessment on smoking habits
(estimated sticks/day; zero for
non- or ex-smoker) and provide
smoking cessation counselling
Self-Management
Education
At diagnosis, and
whenever there is a
change of medication
• Educate on what to do during
acute exacerbations;
• Inhaler technique assessment
Spirometry#
At  diagnosis

Influenza Vaccination~
Annually or per season
As
recommended
under
the
National
Adult
Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS)
Pneumococcal Vaccination
(PPSV23 only)#
1 or 2 doses depending
on age and other
medical conditions
As
recommended
under
the
National
Adult
Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator


21 A pulmonary function test/spirometry is necessary for the diagnosis of COPD for CDMP/CHAS purposes.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Consider Specialist Referral
Severe Cases or Complex Cases
• Management difficulties:
o Cor pulmonale
o Bullous disease
o For initiation of home oxygen therapy, i.e., long term oxygen therapy
• Rapid decline in FEV1 (> 60 ml/year decrease)
• Symptoms disproportionate to FEV1
• Frequent infections
• Development of new symptoms (e.g. haemoptysis) or new physical signs (e.g.
cyanosis, peripheral oedema)
• Frequent exacerbations (e.g. two or more requiring antibiotics or steroids per year
or at least one leading to hospitalisation in the previous year) despite compliance
to treatment
• Patients with features of both asthma and COPD
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Require follow-up monitoring for onset of new symptoms, decreased effort
tolerance, adherence to medication and smoking cessation advice

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Drugs related to the treatment of COPD and its complications of COPD
✓ Items involved in drug administration, such as spacers and accompanying masks
dispensed in appropriate quantities, necessary for the patient’s own use
✓ Investigations for good prescribing practice to avoid drug-related complications
(e.g. serum theophylline)
✓ Pulmonary rehabilitation
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
 Medications not approved for COPD, including mast cell stabilisers (e.g. Ketotifen)
 Investigations unrelated to the diagnosis or follow-up of COPD
 Non evidence-based investigations such as hand-held spirometry
 Purchase of oxygen tanks, nebulisers or other home nursing equipment

References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease – Diagnosis and
management (updated 3 June 2024)
2. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines on Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (Dec
2017) – MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines*

* MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless
otherwise specified in individual guidelines. Users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines
are only as current as the evidence that supports them, and new evidence can supersede
recommendations made in the guidelines.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)
sorders
6. Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)
(Requires reporting of clinical indicators as detailed in Chapter Four: Capture and Submission of
Clinical Data)

Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) is defined by persistent abnormalities of kidney structure or function
for more than 3 months. Diagnosis and staging of CKD is based on eGFR, uACR or other markers
of kidney damage including structural abnormalities on imaging studies. The duration of 3 months
differentiates acute and chronic kidney disease.

Common causes of CKD in Singapore include diabetic nephropathy and hypertension. Other causes
of CKD include cystic disease (e.g., polycystic kidney disease), glomerulonephritis (both primary or
secondary due to conditions like autoimmune disease), or structural causes such as chronic
pyelonephritis, urinary flow obstruction.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure
Measurement~
Twice a year
ACE-I and ARBs should be used for BP
control when proteinuria is present
Weight and BMI
Assessment
Twice a year
Keep
BMI
<
23kg/m2
(For
Non-Asian
population, keep BMI < 25 kg/m2)
Kidney Function
Monitoring – eGFR
and/or Serum Creatinine~
Annually
If eGFR is submitted, either the CKD-EPI or
MDRD formula may be used. The CKD-EPI is
more accurate, particularly at higher GFR.
Urinary Protein – Urine
Protein Creatinine Ratio
(uPCR) or AlbuminCreatinine Ratio (uACR)~
Annually
Monitoring of uACR in all patients, or uPCR
if significant levels of proteinuria (as
defined
in
evidence-based
practice
guidelines)
Albumin/ Calcium/
Phosphate

Annually
For patients with CKD stage G3aA3
Full blood count

Annually with eGFR
30-59 ml/min/1.73
m2 and twice a year
with eGFR < 30
ml/min/1.73m2
For patients with CKD stage G3aA2 or G13A3

To rule out causes of iron-deficiency
anaemia before managing for anaemia of
chronic disease
Lipid Profile

Annually
All patients should be risk stratified (as
recommended in the Lipids ACG)
Targets
of
treatment
should
be
personalised by levels of risk
Diabetes Screening

Annually or once
every three years, as
clinically indicated
Screening should be carried out every three
years for those with normal glucose
tolerance
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Kidney Disease (Nephritis/Nephrosis)
sorders
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Pneumococcal
Vaccination#
1 or 2 doses
depending on age
and other medical
conditions
As recommended under the National Adult
Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
~This is also a reportable clinical indicator
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended

• Later stages of CKD (e.g., CKD 3b to 5)
• Primary cause of CKD is suspected (e.g., glomerulonephritis or autoimmune diseases)
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Further diagnostic assessment needed (e.g., kidney biopsy)
• Rapidly progressive CKD (i.e., a ≥ 25% decline in eGFR from baseline or > 5
mL/min/1.73m2/year decline)
• Acute kidney injury (AKI)
• Anaemia secondary to CKD
• Resistant hypertension or refractory hypertension suspected to be secondary to CKD
• Multiple comorbidities, such as heart failure or rheumatological conditions
• Persistent hyperkalaemia
•
Bone disease or abnormal calcium metabolism
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Are able to reach individualised BP target based on severity of chronic kidney disease
and proteinuria
• Have stable kidney function (decline <30% over 4-month follow-up)
• Are not hyperkalaemic

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Pre- and post-dialysis investigations
✓ The treatment of complications, such as renal osteodystrophy, as well as complications
of dialysis
✓ Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥27.5 kg/m2
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
 Unrelated investigations, e.g. myeloma panels
 Transplant-related investigations and/or procedures
References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Chronic Kidney Disease — Early Detection (7 October 2022)
2. ACE Clinical Guidance on Chronic Kidney Disease — Delaying Progression and Reducing
Cardiovascular Complications (27 October 2023)

CDMP Mental Illnesses
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CDMP-Mental Illnesses
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

7. Anxiety Disorders 22 differ from normal anxiety by being of greater intensity and/or
duration (e.g. lasting more than 6 months) than would be expected in the given
circumstances. The disorders can affect daily life, give rise to unexplained physical
symptoms, or lead to avoidance of situations and places.

8. Major Depressive Disorder is a mental illness characterised by low mood, anhedonia,
significant weight loss/gain, insomnia/hypersomnia, psychomotor agitation or
retardation, fatigue or loss of energy, feeling of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt,
diminished ability to think or concentrate, and recurrent thoughts of suicide. Other milder
psychiatric conditions, organic conditions or prescription medication-induced depression
should be excluded.

9. Bipolar Disorder is a mental illness characterised by episodes of mania and depression.
During acute episodes, there may be either an elevation of mood with increased energy
and activity, or a lowering of mood with decreased activity.

10. Schizophrenia 23  is a mental illness characterised by delusions, hallucinations,
disorganised speech, disorganised or catatonic behaviour, and negative symptoms. Other
psychotic disorders and organic brain disorders should be excluded.

* In order to provide greater support (e.g. professionally as well as drugs) for general
practitioners (GPs) managing patients with mental illness, GPs are required to participate in
the Mental Health GP Partnership Programmes with Restructured Hospitals before
CDMP/CHAS claims can be made.





22 Anxiety disorders claimable under CDMP/CHAS are General Anxiety Disorder, Panic Disorder, Phobic Anxiety
Disorders. While Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and Post-traumatic Stress Disorder are no longer classified as
anxiety disorders under the DSM 5, they may continue to be claimed under anxiety disorders under
CDMP/CHAS.
23 Delusional disorder is claimable under CDMP/CHAS.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CDMP Mental Illnesses
sorders
Part Ia: Additional Recommended Care Components for Anxiety Disorders
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
GAD-7 score#
At the intake
assessment, prior to
stepdown/discharge and
6-monthly

World Health Organisation
Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0)#
Annually
Administer at first consultation, and
at 6-monthly or at discharge
whichever is earlier
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part Ib: Recommended Care Components for Major Depressive Disorder
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
PHQ-9 score#
At the intake
assessment, prior to
stepdown/discharge and
6-monthly

World Health Organisation
Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0)#
Annually
Administer at first consultation,
and at 6-monthly or at discharge
whichever is earlier
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part Ic: Recommended Care Components for Bipolar Disorder
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Clinical Global Impression
(CGI) Scale#
Annually
CGI assessment for
• Severity (Scores 1-7)
• Clinical improvement (Scores 1-7)
*1 indicates “normal/no mental
illness” or “very much improved”
World Health Organisation
Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0)#
Annually
Administer at first consultation, and
at 6-monthly or at discharge
whichever is earlier
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CDMP Mental Illnesses
sorders
Part Id: Recommended Care Components for Schizophrenia
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Monitoring for metabolic
side effects (e.g. fasting
blood glucose and lipid
profile)#
Annually
Only for patients with Schizophrenia
on atypical antipsychotic medications
Clinical Global Impression
(CGI) Scale#
Annually
CGI assessment for
• Severity (Scores 1-7)
• Clinical improvement (Scores 1-7)
*1
indicates
“normal/no
mental
illness” or “very much improved”
World Health Organisation
Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0)#
Annually
Administer at first consultation, and at
6-monthly or at discharge whichever
is earlier
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
a) Anxiety Disorders
Specialist Referral Recommended
Initial assessment
• Assessment, diagnosis and initiation of treatment, when in doubt
High Risk Individuals
• With symptoms of mania or psychosis
• Risk of violence to self or others, especially patients with suicidal risk
• Substance misuse, addiction, and abuse
• Complex psychiatric conditions (e.g., feeding and eating disorders, personality
disorders)
• Patients with medicolegal and forensic issues
• Severe impairment to self-care, or inability to go to work or school for sustained
periods
Failure of treatment
• Failure of one or two trials of medication
• Need for hypnotics (e.g. Benzodiazepines, Zopiclone) and/or formal psychotherapy
Consider Specialist Input
Special Patient Population
• Pregnant, postpartum/breastfeeding, or paediatric patients
• Military/uniformed personnels
Complex Cases
• Complicated by medical, psychiatric and/or psychosocial co-morbidities, including
addiction disorders and substance abuse
• Unstable/uncontrolled symptoms, e.g. recent hospitalisation within last 6 months

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CDMP Mental Illnesses
sorders
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• Monitoring for adherence, early signs of relapse, medication side effects and
medication adjustment
• Non-pharmacological interventions, e.g. counselling or psychotherapy

b) Major Depressive Disorder and c) Bipolar Disorder
Specialist Referral Recommended
Initial assessment
• Assessment, diagnosis and initiation of treatment, when in doubt
High Risk Individuals
• Patients experiencing manic episode
• Having psychosis (hallucinations or odd beliefs)
• Symptoms of catatonia (refusing to talk, eat or drink)
• Risk of violence to self or others, especially patients with suicidal risk
• Need for hospitalisation
• Substance misuse, addiction, and abuse
• Complex psychiatric conditions (e.g., feeding and eating disorders, personality
disorders)
• Patients with medicolegal and forensic issues
• Severe impairment to self-care, or inability to go to work or school for sustained
periods
Failure of treatment
• Failure of one or two trials of medication
• Need for augmentation or combination therapy (e.g. with mood stabilisers,
psychotherapy)
• Need for specialised treatment (e.g. Electroconvulsive treatment)

Consider Specialist Input
Special Patient Population
• Pregnant, postpartum/breastfeeding women, or paediatric patients
• Military/uniformed personnels
Complex Cases
• Complicated by medical, psychiatric and/or psychosocial co-morbidities, including
addiction disorders and substance abuse
• Unstable/uncontrolled symptoms, e.g. recent hospitalisation within last 6 months
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
Follow up
• Monitoring for adherence, early signs of relapse, medication side effects and
medication adjustment
• Optimisation of metabolic risk factors (especially for patients on anti-psychotics)
• Non-pharmacological interventions, e.g. counselling or psychotherapy

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CDMP Mental Illnesses
sorders
d) Schizophrenia
Specialist Referral Recommended
Initial assessment
• Assessment, diagnosis and initiation of treatment, when in doubt
High Risk Individuals
• Risk of violence to self or others
• Unstable/uncontrolled symptoms, e.g. recent hospitalisation within last 6 months
Consider Specialist Input
Special Patient Population
• Pregnant, paediatric or geriatric patients
• Forensic or medico-legal issues involved
Complex Cases
• Unexpected changes in symptomatology
• Drug-related complications
• Treatment resistance
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
Follow up
• Monitoring for adherence, early signs of relapse, medication side effects and
medication adjustment
• Optimisation of metabolic risk factors (especially for patients on anti-psychotics)

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable items
Applicable to all Mental Illnesses
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Treatments such as Psychological Therapy, Electro-Convulsive Therapy (ECT),
Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy and Speech Therapy
✓ Counselling and mental health support services
Non-Claimable
 Sedatives-hypnotics

Stroke
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
11. Stroke
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Cerebrovascular disease (CVD) is a heterogeneous disease. There are clear pathological subtypes – transient ischaemic attack (TIA), cerebral infarction, primary intracerebral
haemorrhage and subarachnoid haemorrhage – with over 100 potential underlying causes. It
may affect men and women of any age and can manifest as a minor episode lasting less than
24 hours (TIA), to a major life threatening or disabling event, and even death. Survivors of
strokes may make a complete recovery or have varying degrees of disability.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Stroke
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Thromboembolism Risk
Assessment#
As clinically
indicated
Evaluate for atrial fibrillation,
cardiac murmurs, fasting glucose
and need for anti-thrombotic
therapy
Rehabilitation Need Assessment
At baseline

Blood Pressure Measurement#
Twice a year

Lipid Profile#
Annually
All patients with ischaemic stroke
are at high risk of cardiovascular
events and do not require further
risk stratification
Patients with haemorrhagic
stroke should be risk stratified in
the absence of significant
medical conditions (as
recommended in the Lipids ACG)
Smoking Assessment#
Annually for
smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless
there is a change
in smoking habit
Assessment on smoking habits
(estimated sticks/day; zero for
non- or ex-smoker) and provide
smoking cessation counselling
Influenza Vaccination#^
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the
National
Adult
Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator
^ Note on Pneumococcal Vaccines: While stroke alone is not an indication for pneumococcal
vaccination under NAIS in an 18–64-year-old patient, such patients with stroke often have
comorbidities such as diabetes or cardiovascular disease for which NAIS does recommend
pneumococcal vaccination. Refer to NAIS for more details.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Stroke
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
• New (suspected) onset of TIA or Stroke
• New onset of atrial fibrillation or cardiac murmurs requiring further evaluation
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who are
• On long term anticoagulation (i.e. warfarin) for dose adjustment
• On anti-platelet therapy and require continued management of their cardiovascular
risk factors

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Treatment of stroke complications such as pressure ulcers
✓ Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥ 27.5 kg/m2
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-Claimable
 Supplements such as Vitamin B/B12 (except for cases with documented deficiency)
 Dietary supplements (e.g. Glucerna, Ensure)
 Purchase of medical equipment such as blood pressure monitoring equipment,
walking aids, wheelchairs and other home nursing equipment
 Nootropics (e.g. piracetam)

Dementia
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
12. Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes.)

Major neurocognitive disorders (dementia) encompass a spectrum of disorders where there
is a primary deficit in cognitive function. It may be due to one or more aetiologies that are
acquired later in life, rather than developmental in origin. Examples of possible aetiologies
include Alzheimer’s disease, vascular disease, and Parkinson’s disease.

Diagnosis of a major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) involves evidence of significant
cognitive decline from a previous level of performance in one or more of the following
cognitive domains: complex attention, executive function, learning and memory, language,
perceptual-motor, or social cognition; with interference with independence in everyday
activities.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Major Neurocognitive Disorder (Dementia)
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Cognitive assessment

Annually
For
patients
on
cognitive
enhancers,
objective
documentation
of
memory
assessment
with
a
validated
instrument
(e.g.
Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA))
must be performed
Assessment of Mood and
Behaviour
Annually
Enquiring
about
mood
and
behaviour
and
initiating
appropriate non-pharmacological
and/or
pharmacological
treatment where appropriate
Assessment of Social Difficulties
and Caregiver stress (if any)
Annually
Assessment and referral to care
coordinator,
medical
social
worker or appropriate community
services may be required
Functional Needs Assessment
Annually
To assess home safety, driving
safety, falls, functional decline and
swallowing difficulties
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As
recommended
under
the
National
Adult
Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Dementia
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended

• Young onset dementia (YOD) i.e. onset < 65 years of age
• Patients who decline rapidly (based on feedback from caregiver and clinical
impression)
• Patients in whom diagnosis of major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) is
uncertain
• Uncontrolled behavioural and neuropsychiatric symptoms despite trial of
pharmacological/non-pharmacological interventions

Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who
• Have minimal behaviour problems or behaviours that are well controlled with
modest doses of medications
• Are stable with minimal coping issues in both patient and caregiver
• Have mild to moderate dementia and are keen to drive. These patients will require
a driving assessment by an Occupational Therapist

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Drugs for the management of major neurocognitive disorder (dementia) (e.g.
cognitive enhancers) or the behavioural and psychological symptoms of major
neurocognitive
disorder
(dementia)
(e.g.
acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors,
antipsychotics)
Non-Claimable
 Off-label/non-HSA registered/non-evidence-based medications or therapies (e.g.
NSAIDs, COX2 inhibitors and prednisolone) for prevention of cognitive decline
 Dietary supplements (e.g. Vitamin E, Ginkgo) or traditional medications/therapies
(e.g. aromatherapy or massage therapy)

Osteoarthritis
sorders
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
13. Osteoarthritis
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Osteoarthritis is characterised by focal areas of loss of articular cartilage within synovial joints,
leading to pain and gradual loss of function, and typically affects older people. The diagnosis
can be made clinically based on history and physical examination, with laboratory and
radiologic investigations selectively undertaken to exclude inflammatory arthritis, secondary
osteoarthritis and non-articular causes of joint pain. Evidence that led to the eventual
diagnosis of osteoarthritis (i.e. diagnostic symptoms, signs, laboratory and radiologic
investigations) should be clearly documented in the clinical notes.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Osteoarthritis
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Assessment of joint pain
Annually

Prescription and Review of
Exercise Plan
Annually
In the form of a directed or supervised
muscle
strengthening
or
aerobic
exercise programme
May be undertaken by physiotherapist
Weight and BMI Assessment (if
applicable, e.g., osteoarthritis of
the knee)#
Annually
Consider keeping BMI < 23kg/m2 (For
Non-Asian
population,
consider
keeping BMI < 25 kg/m2)
Basic Activities of Daily Living
(ADL) Assessment (if
appropriate)#
Six basic ADLs: washing, toileting,
dressing, feeding, mobility and
transferring
Annually
Helps to determine functional status

Should be considered for patients
deemed to have limitations in certain
daily activities through history and/or
physical examination

Referral to physiotherapy/
occupational therapy assessment for
assisted devices should be considered
if bADLs are affected
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Osteoarthritis
sorders
Part II: Consideration for  Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
Lack of Response to Conservative Treatment
✓  Lack of significant improvement of pain, stability or function despite adequate
conservative (non-pharmacological and pharmacological) treatment
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who
✓ Require long-term follow up of mild to moderate disease
✓ Pain is adequately controlled with analgesics and physiotherapy
✓ Have severe disease with multiple co-morbidities, not a suitable candidate for
surgical management


Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable

Claimable
✓ Intra-articular steroid injections
✓ Investigations related to the management (e.g. X-ray, MRI) and complications (e.g.
diagnostic knee aspiration after intra-articular steroid injections) of osteoarthritis
✓ Drug therapy for weight management (e.g. orlistat), as an adjunctive to lifestyle
modification and combined with diet and physical activity, when BMI is ≥ 27.5
kg/m2
✓ Post-total knee replacement management
Non-Claimable
 Off-label/non-HSA registered medications, dietary supplements or alternative
therapies (e.g. glucosamine/chondroitin, calcium, and acupuncture and
chiropractic therapy)
 Intra-articular viscosupplementation, oral steroids and therapeutic knee
aspirations as evidence for these procedures are weak

Parkinson’s Disease
sorders
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
14. Parkinson’s Disease24
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Parkinson’s disease is an age-related chronic progressive neurodegenerative disorder with an
increase in incidence after the age of 60 years. The predominant motor features of
Parkinson’s disease include asymmetric tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity. Non-motor
symptoms include autonomic dysfunction, falls, sleep disturbances, and cognitive
abnormalities.
Part I: Recommended Care Components for Parkinson’s Disease
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Review of Diagnosis
Annually
The
diagnosis
should
be
reviewed
regularly
and
reassessed if there are atypical
features
(e.g.,
falls
at
presentation and early in the
disease course, poor response to
levodopa, symmetry at onset,
rapid progression to Hoehn &
Yahr stage 3 in 3 years, lack of
tremor or dysautonomia)
Review of Treatment
Annually
Review and discussion regarding
medical and surgical treatment
options, as well as need for
rehabilitative
therapies
(physiotherapy,
occupational
therapy and speech therapy)
Review of Complications
Annually
Assessment
for
cognitive
impairment,
psychiatric
disorders
(e.g.
depression,
psychosis),
autonomic
dysfunction (e.g. constipation,
incontinence,
orthostatic
hypotension),
falls,
sleep
disorders,
and
medicationrelated side effects
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the
National
Adult
Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

24 For the purpose of CDMP/CHAS, Parkinson’s disease encompasses Idiopathic Parkinson’s and secondary
Parkinsonism due to other aetiologies.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Parkinson’s Disease
sorders
Part II: Consideration for  Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
Complicated or Atypical Parkinsonism
• Young-onset (≤ 55 years old) Parkinson’s disease
• Atypical Parkinsonism
• Parkinson’s disease complicated by dyskinesia, dystonia, myoclonus or gaze palsies
Consider Specialist Input
Complicated or Atypical Parkinsonism
• Patients who do not respond to levodopa or dopamine agonists
• Patients with cognitive impairment or neuropsychiatric dysfunction
• Family history of Parkinson’s disease
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Require long-term follow up and medication

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable

Claimable
✓ Drugs related to management of Parkinson’s Disease (e.g. levodopa)
✓ Medications for management of complications or side effects of Parkinson’s Disease
medications (e.g. postural hypotension, laxatives for constipation)
Non-Claimable
 Dietary supplements or traditional medications/therapies (e.g. CoEnzyme Q10)

Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
sorders
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
15. Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH) can be defined as prostate adenoma and is one of the
most common urological disorders amongst elderly males. Patients may present with
symptoms such as urinary retention, and lower urinary tract symptoms which can be further
subdivided into voiding (poor stream, hesitancy, intermittency, straining and terminal
dribbling) and storage (frequency, urgency, incontinence, nocturia) symptoms.

Important differential diagnoses to rule out are carcinoma of the lower urinary tract, and
neuropathic bladders due to aetiologies such as diabetes mellitus, Parkinson’s disease, or
infective causes.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for BPH
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Review of Lower Urinary Tract
Symptoms
Annually
Recommended tool for assessing
the severity of LUTS is the
International Prostate SymptomQuality of Life (IPSS-QoL) Score
Clinical Examination –
Abdominal and Digital Rectal
Exam
Initial assessment
Abdominal examination includes
assessment for a palpable bladder.
Rectal examination to assess size,
consistency and regularity of
prostate
Co-Morbidity Assessment
(includes medication review)
Initial assessment

Urinalysis #
Initial assessment
Screen for haematuria, pyuria and
glycosuria
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator



Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Consider Specialist Input
• Gross (refer urgently)/microscopic haematuria (normal referral to urology)
• Worsening/persistent symptoms despite treatment
• Urinary incontinence
• Recurrent urinary tract infection
• Hard or nodular prostate on digital rectal exam
• Complications arising from obstruction like hydronephrosis, acute retention of
urine.
• Abnormal PSA levels (> 4.0 µg/L/ml)
•
A rise in PSA while on 5 Alpha Reductase Inhibitor

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia (BPH)
sorders
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients whose
• Symptoms well controlled, require long term follow up and assessment
Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Investigations related to the management of Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia and its
complications (e.g. PSA tests)
Non-Claimable
 Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors
 Testosterone tests
 Dietary supplements or traditional medications/therapies (e.g. Saw palmetto
extract)

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Epilepsy
sorders
16. Epilepsy
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)


Epilepsy is defined when an individual has recurrent unprovoked seizures due to the abnormal
or excessive neuronal discharge. Seizures may be focal or generalised and may result in
sensory, motor, or autonomic disturbances, which may sometimes be accompanied by loss
of consciousness and control of bowel or bladder function.

The diagnosis of epilepsy in adults is best established by a neurologist who will have better
access to the investigative tools necessary to confirm the diagnosis including classifying the
epilepsy syndrome.

The diagnosis of epilepsy in children and adolescents should be established by a paediatric
neurologist.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Epilepsy
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum Frequency*
Remarks
Review of seizure control
(including seizure frequency and
type, and seizure free duration)
Annually

Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per season
As recommended under the
National Adult Immunisation
Schedule (NAIS) and National
Childhood
Immunisation
Schedule (NCIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
 Consider Specialist Input
• Inadequate seizure control (e.g. in general less than 1 year between seizures while
on anti-epileptic drug (AED))
• Potential withdrawal of AEDs in patients with more than one AED
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• Able to achieve good seizure control (i.e. seizure-free for at least 1 year)
• Titration and review of AEDs by the family physician according to a weaning
regimen prescribed by the specialist for patients who have been seizure-free for at
least 2 years

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Epilepsy
sorders
Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Investigations (except genetic testing) to evaluate seizure aetiology, e.g. EEG and
MRI brain
✓ Investigations related to the management of epilepsy and its complications, e.g. full
blood count, renal panel, liver function test, vitamin D and calcium levels
✓ Ketogenic diet initiated by a specialist in neurology or paediatrics for children who
have drug resistant epilepsy (i.e. child has failed to become seizure free/stay seizure
free with adequate trials of 2 AEDs) and where medically necessary as treatment
for those who are on enteral feeding or predominately on milk feeds
✓ Investigations to monitor/guide treatments, e.g. AED blood levels for detection of
non-adherence, suspected toxicity, adjustment of phenytoin dose, HLA-B 1502
genotyping for susceptibility to carbamazepine allergy
✓ Investigations to monitor complications of treatments (including ketogenic diet)
✓ Supplements in specific situations where there is documented deficiency or where
medically indicated (e.g. supra-physiological doses of pyridoxine, pyridoxal
phosphate and folinic acid for vitamin-responsive seizures, and carnitine for those
on sodium valproate and at risk of secondary carnitine deficiency)
Non-Claimable

Genetic testing for epilepsy

Nootropics (e.g. piracetam)

Table 3.7: List of Claimable Investigations for Patients on Ketogenic Diet
At baseline and on routine follow-up if indicated:
Full blood count
Renal panel
Liver panel
Lipid panel
ECG
AED level
Betahydroxybutyrate
Random urine calcium & creatinine
Urine organic acids
Urine ketones
Magnesium
Serum amino acids
Lactate
Ammonia
EEG
Renal ultrasound

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Osteoporosis
sorders
17. Osteoporosis
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Osteoporosis is a skeletal disease in which bone density and quality are reduced.
Unrecognised or untreated osteoporosis increases fracture risk.

Common sites of fracture are the vertebral bodies of the spine, the femoral neck,  forearm
and proximal humerus. Recognising the patient’s risk of osteoporosis or fragility fractures can
enable appropriate diagnosis and management, keeping the patient fracture-free.

Osteoporosis should be diagnosed based on Dual Energy X-Ray Absorptiometry (DXA) of hip
and spine, and/or previous fragility fracture. Currently, the use of methods other than DXA to
diagnose osteoporosis is not recommended.

Individuals found to have osteoporosis should have relevant clinical, laboratory and
radiological assessments to exclude differentials and secondary causes of osteoporosis, so
that appropriate management may be implemented.

Table 3.8: WHO definitions based on BMD
BMD T-score (S.D.)
Definition
≥ -1
Normal
< -1 to > -2.5
Low bone mass (osteopenia)
≤ -2.5
Osteoporosis
≤ -2.5 and a fragility fracture
Severe or established osteoporosis

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Osteoporosis
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
DXA scan#
At least once
every 1-3 years25
For treatment monitoring, consider DXA at
baseline, after one to two years of treatment (to
establish clinical effectiveness), and every two to
three years thereafter. Clinicians may review the
frequency of DXA assessment accordingly based
on patients’ risk factors and response to
treatment.
WHO Fracture Risk
Assessment Tool
(FRAX Score)#
Annually
http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp to access
FRAX score calculator
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator



25 When BMD has normalised, frequency of DXA scans should be based on patient’s osteoporosis risk (viz low,
moderate, or high) as defined in Osteoporosis Self-Assessment Tool for Asians (OSTA). For detailed practice
recommendations, clinicians are advised to refer to updated clinical guidance (e.g. ACGs).

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Osteoporosis
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Consider Specialist Input
• Male or pre-menopausal female patients
• Patients with/suspected of secondary osteoporosis (e.g. disproportionately low Zscores, long-term steroid use, co-existing endocrine diseases such as
hyperparathyroidism, hypogonadism, hypercortisolism and hyperthyroidism)
• Patients with structural or congenital bone condition
• Patients with multiple fragility fractures AND very low DXA BMD (T-score <-3.0)
• Patients who adhere to treatment and experience fragility fractures or continued
bone loss (>4-5% deterioration in DXA BMD) after at least a year of treatment
• Creatinine clearance estimated by Cockcroft-Gault equation <30ml/minute
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• Patients with primary osteoporosis and on bone protective agent
• Patients with secondary osteoporosis who are stable and compliant with
medications

 Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Oral bisphosphonates and evidence supported therapies, e.g.
o IV Zoledronic acid, raloxifene, subcutaneous teriparatide, and denosumab
where medically indicated, such as for patients at high risk of fractures and
unable to comply with oral bisphosphonates
o Vitamin D analogues (e.g. alfacalcidol and calcitriol) for glucocorticoidinduced osteoporosis
✓ Investigations related to the management of osteoporosis (DXA scans and blood
tests for levels of calcium, vitamin D, thyroid stimulating hormone, parathyroid
hormone)
✓ Calcium and vitamin D for patients with established deficiencies or those who are
unlikely to meet the respective daily requirements
✓ Treatment of osteopenia for individuals with no fractures (i.e. no history of any
clinical fracture or asymptomatic vertebral fracture), but with high fracture risk
(calculated using the Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX) and/or assessment of
other relevant risk factors), after weighing risk and benefits with patients.
Non-Claimable
 Testosterone and hormone replacement therapy (HRT)

References

1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Osteoporosis - Identification and management in primary
care (November 2018)

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Psoriasis
sorders
18. Psoriasis
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease that typically follows a relapsing and remitting
course. Plaque psoriasis is the most common subtype of psoriasis and is characterised by welldelineated erythematous plaques with overlying scales, with or without pustules.

Typical sites of involvement are the scalp, behind the ears or in the concha, on extensor
surfaces of joints (i.e. elbows and knees), and the sacral area and intergluteal cleft. It is
commonly associated with characteristic nail changes (e.g. > 5 pits on any nail, onycholysis or
subungual hyperkeratosis) and joint pains, especially fingers showing dactylitis.

Psoriatic arthritis is an inflammatory polyarthritis that may develop in up to 30% of people
with psoriasis. The most common clinical manifestations are peripheral arthritis, axial skeletal
disease, enthesitis, and dactylitis. There is no definitive test to diagnose psoriatic arthritis.

Part I: Recommended Care Components for Psoriasis
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Assessment of psoriatic
arthritis
Annually

Monitor for joint pain. If present, to proceed
with recommended tool for assessment –
Psoriasis Epidemiology Screening Tool (PEST)
and refer to specialist
Body Surface Area (BSA)
affected by psoriasis#
Annually
Use patient’s palm as an estimate of 1% BSA
and consider referral to specialist if BSA >
10%
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Patients with rash that cannot be controlled with topical therapy
• Patients potentially requiring systemic agent or phototherapy for management of
psoriasis
Consider Specialist Input
• Patient with  rapid and/or considerable change in psoriasis (e.g. rapid BSA
extension, frequent flares, plaque psoriasis fluctuating between pustulation and
remission)
• Patients with generalised pustular psoriasis or erythroderma
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Have stable/low disease activity
• Are on long term methotrexate# (with specialist review every six months to one
year)

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Psoriasis
sorders
# In the management of these patients, primary care physicians should be guided by detailed
management plans set out by the specialist (who should oversee the monitoring of the
lifetime dose for patients, as well as perform drug titration as necessary).

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable
Claimable
✓ Phototherapy
✓ Systemic non-biologic therapy, e.g. Methotrexate, Cyclosporine, Acitretin
✓ Biologics treatment
✓ Baseline investigations before starting systemic and biologics therapy (e.g. full
blood count, renal panel, liver panel, chest radiograph, hepatitis B and C screening)
✓ Routine investigations for patients on oral systemic and biologics therapy
✓ Investigations to monitor joint involvement
• Moisturisers and other over-the-counter topical applications, which are (i) clinically
indicated based on the latest CPGs or ACGs issued by MOH, and/or best available
evidence-based practice; (ii) prescribed by a doctor; and (iii) are on the MOH List of
Subsidised Drugs, e.g.:
o moisturisers: aqueous cream, urea cream, white soft paraffin
o other over-the-counter topical applications: coal tar, salicylic acid, olive oil
• Topical applications which are (i) Prescription Only Medicines as classified by HSA;
(ii) clearly indicated in the treatment notes; and (iii) clinically indicated based on the
latest ACGs issued by MOH, and/or best available evidence-based practice, e.g.:
o Corticosteroid creams/ointment (e.g. hydrocortisone, betamethasone valerate,
betamethasone dipropionate)
o Vitamin D analogues
Non-Claimable
 Over-the-counter products (e.g., ‘branded’ moisturisers, emollients, bath solutions)
purchased without (i) a prescription as classified by HSA, (ii) clear indications in
treatment notes, and/or (iii) clinical indications based on the latest CPGs or ACGs
issued by MOH, and/or best available evidence-based practice

Table 3.9: List of Claimable Investigations for Patients who are Presently on or Initiating
Oral Systemic and Biologic Therapy
At baseline
On routine follow-up
Full blood count
Liver panel
Renal panel
Chest X-ray
Hepatitis B and C screening
TB-spot (before starting biologics)
Liver fibroscan/Magnetic resonance
elastography (if indicated)

Before starting acitretin
Fasting lipids

For patients on MTX:
Full blood count
Liver panel
Creatinine (periodically)
Liver fibroscan/Magnetic resonance
elastography (if indicated)

For patients on cyclosporin:
Renal panel
Liver Panel

For patients on acitretin:

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Psoriasis
sorders
At baseline
On routine follow-up
Before starting cyclosporin
Fasting lipids
Serum magnesium
Liver Panel
Fasting lipids

Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
sorders
Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
19. Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)26
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required to
document these assessments in case notes)

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune disease of unknown aetiology.
Affected patients typically present with  inflammatory pain and stiffness of synovial joints,
with progressive joint destruction and loss of physical function in advanced stages. Patients
may also have extra-articular manifestations such as sicca symptoms, interstitial lung disease,
and vasculitis; and systemic comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis.

A rheumatoid arthritis flare is characterised by worsening disease activity, commonly
accompanied by raised inflammatory markers. It must be distinguished from noninflammatory causes of worsening joint pain and swelling, as well as emergency causes like
septic arthritis.

Patients who meet one of the following classification criteria will be eligible for claims under
Rheumatoid Arthritis.

1) Patients who meet the 1987 ARA criteria for rheumatoid arthritis or the 2010
ACR/EULAR Diagnostic criteria for rheumatoid arthritis, or
2) Established rheumatoid arthritis with characteristic features such as joint swelling
and deformity, or
3) Early rheumatoid arthritis previously diagnosed and followed up by a
rheumatologist, or

Part I: Recommended Care Components for RA
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum Frequency*
Remarks
Assessment of RA Disease
Activity
Annually
Number
of
tender/swollen
joints, CRP or ESR;
Measures of disease activity
must
be
obtained
and
documented
regularly,
as
frequently as monthly for
patients with high/moderate
disease
activity,
or
less
frequently (at least at 6-month
intervals)
for
patients
in
sustained low disease activity
or remission.
*More frequently if clinically indicated

26 Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis previously diagnosed and followed up by a rheumatologist is claimable under
CDMP/CHAS. Spondyloarthritis/Ankylosing spondylitis and adult-onset Still’s disease are not claimable under
CDMP/CHAS.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
• Patients requiring new initiation of DMARD therapy
• Patients with RA flares requiring either high dose (e.g. prednisolone > 10mg/day) or
long term (≥ 6 months) glucocorticoid therapy (which should be accompanied by
appropriate dose adjustment of DMARDs)
• Patients with extra-articular manifestations of RA
• Patients on biologic DMARD therapy
• Paediatric patients with ≥ 6 weeks of persistent joint swelling and joint pain
Consider Specialist Input
• Patients who develop active disease (1 or more swollen and/or tender joints, high
ESR/CRP, or extra-articular disease) while on maintenance therapy
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• Patients deemed to be in DMARD-free remission
• Patients deemed to have quiescent/low disease activity (no swollen and/or tender
joints, ESR/CRP within normal range) for at least 3-6 months under a specialist’s care
• Patients on (non-biologic) DMARD therapy at low and stable maintenance dosages

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA)
sorders
Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Claimable
✓ Investigations for the monitoring of rheumatoid arthritis and its related
complications (e.g. full blood count, renal panel, liver function test, CRP, ESR, X-rays)
✓ Non-biologic DMARD therapy
✓ Biologic DMARD therapy where medically indicated (e.g. where disease is
inadequately controlled with non-biologic DMARD therapy)
✓ Investigations performed prior to the initiation of DMARD (biologic & non-biologic)
therapy, e.g. hepatitis B and C serology, T-spot TB
✓ Baseline eye screening, and annually after five years of drug institution, for patients
on hydroxychloroquine
✓ Anti-inflammatory agents (e.g. NSAIDS, selective COX-2 inhibitors and
glucocorticoids) as adjunct treatments
Non-Claimable
 Serum Rheumatoid Factor (RF), anti-CCP Antibody testing and other investigations
done prior to and not leading to diagnosis of disease

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Ischaemic Heart Disease
sorders
20. Ischaemic Heart Disease (IHD)27
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required
to document these assessments in case notes)

Ischaemic heart disease (IHD)/coronary artery disease (CAD) includes stable and
unstable angina pectoris, myocardial infarction (MI), complications following MI, and
plaques visualised in the coronary arteries without ischaemia.28

IHD results when coronary artery plaque develops and reduces the oxygen supply to
the myocardium. Early intervention is required to prevent disease progression and
recurrent cardiovascular events. This includes lifestyle modification and medical
therapy as indicated.

Evidence to support a diagnosis of IHD (for purposes of claims under CDMP) could
include:
a) History of symptoms, prior diagnosis of IHD, current symptoms and/or
investigation findings (e.g. electrocardiogram (ECG), stress test, angiography)
consistent with cardiac ischaemia
b) History of acute coronary syndrome
c) Prior percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG)


27 Includes coronary artery disease for purposes of claims under CDMP/CHAS.
28 Non-ischaemic heart diseases, such as non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy, congenital heart diseases,
arrhythmias and valvular defects, are not covered.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Ischaemic Heart Disease
sorders
Part I: Recommended Care Components for IHD
Recommended Care
Components
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure
Measurement#
Twice a year

Weight and BMI
Assessment#
Twice a year
Keep BMI < 23kg/m2 (For Non-Asian
population, keep BMI < 25 kg/m2)
Lipid Profile#
Annually
Target LDL < 1.8 mmol/L as patients
with IHD/CAD are in the “very high
risk” group (target < 1.4 mmol/L if
post-acute coronary syndrome)
Smoking Assessment#
Annually for
smokers;
Once-off for nonsmokers, unless
there is a change in
smoking habit
Assessment
on
smoking
habits
(estimated sticks/day; zero for non- or
ex-smoker) and provision of smoking
cessation counselling
Diabetes Screening#
Annually or once
every three years,
as clinically
indicated
Screening should be carried out every
three years for those with normal
glucose tolerance, and annually for
those with
impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG) or
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT).
Refer to Diabetes Mellitus chapter for
diagnostic criteria
Kidney Function
Monitoring#

Annually
Especially
for
patients
on
ACE
inhibitors. Serum Cr and eGFR, and
Urine Albumin-Creatinine (uACR) may
be considered.
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the National
Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS)
Pneumococcal
Vaccination (PPSV23
only) #
1 or 2 doses
depending on age
and other medical
conditions
As recommended under the National
Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS)
*More frequently if clinically indicated
#This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Ischaemic Heart Disease
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended
• Emergency or urgent treatment indicated, e.g. unstable angina, myocardial
infarction, and acute decompensated heart failure
• Suboptimal control of IHD risk factors despite lifestyle modification and
optimised medical therapy, e.g. lipids, blood pressure, and diabetes mellitus
Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
• Stable IHD, e.g. stable angina, history of MI but otherwise stable condition

Part III: Claimable/Non-claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-claimable:
Claimable
✓ Investigations for evaluation of IHD severity, monitoring of progression,
detection of complications and guidance on further treatment, e.g. ECG,
stress test, transthoracic echocardiography, cardiac CT angiogram, and
cardiovascular risk factor monitoring such as lipid profile
✓ Gastro-protectants for patients on aspirin or anticoagulation
✓ Smoking cessation
✓ Cardiac rehabilitation
Non-Claimable
 Monitoring devices for cardiovascular risk factors, e.g. blood pressure
monitoring equipment

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Allergic Rhinitis
sorders
21. Allergic Rhinitis29
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required
to document these assessments in case notes)

Allergic rhinitis (AR) is a symptomatic disorder of the nose induced by exposure to
allergens. It involves IgE-mediated inflammation of the mucous membranes lining the
nose and results in the cardinal symptoms of sneezing, nasal obstruction, rhinorrhoea,
postnasal drip, and/or itching (of the eyes, nose, palate). The diagnosis is made
clinically when ≥ 2 symptoms are present on ≥ 2 consecutive days for > 1 hour on most
days. AR can be classified based on symptom frequency (intermittent or persistent)
and severity (mild or moderate/severe)30. Allergen triggers include, but is not limited
to, house dust mite (most common trigger locally), pets, rodents, cockroaches, indoor
moulds, and tobacco smoke.

Evidence that led to the eventual diagnosis of allergic rhinitis (i.e. diagnostic symptoms
and signs) should be clearly documented in the clinical notes.

It is important to treat AR due to its impact on asthma. Other associated atopic
conditions which often present together include allergic conjunctivitis and eczema.
Another related condition is chronic rhinosinusitis, which has distinct diagnostic
criteria and is managed differently from AR.


29Allergic conjunctivitis, eczema, and acute or chronic rhinosinusitis are not covered under CDMP/
CHAS
30 According to Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) 2008, AR can be subdivided into
intermittent or persistent AR and its severity classified as ‘mild’ or ‘moderate/severe’.
1. Classification of allergic rhinitis
a. Intermittent: symptoms present <4 days/week or for <4 consecutive weeks
b. Persistent: symptoms present >4 days/week or for >4 consecutive weeks
2. Severity of AR
a. Mild: none of the following (sleep disturbance, impairment of daily activities, leisure and/or
sport, impairment of school or work) or symptoms present but not troublesome
b. Moderate/severe: ≥1 of the following are present (sleep disturbance, impairment of daily
activities, leisure and/or sport, impairment of school or work); symptoms are troublesome

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Allergic Rhinitis
sorders
Part I: Recommended Care Components for Allergic Rhinitis
 Recommended Care
Component
Minimum Frequency*  Remarks
Assessment and
Education on Allergen
Avoidance
At diagnosis;
thereafter, as clinically
indicated
Patient education regarding
disease course and measures
to
control
exposure
to
allergens.
Allergen
testing
is
not
routinely indicated
Smoking Assessment#
Annually for smokers;
once-off for nonsmokers, unless there
is a change in smoking
habit
Assessment
on
smoking
habits (estimated sticks/day;
zero for non- or ex-smoker)
and
smoking
cessation
counselling.
*More frequently if clinically indicated
# This is also a non-reportable clinical indicator

Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended

• Persistent symptoms despite compliance to treatment
• Red flag symptoms, such as persistent unilateral symptoms, nasal
obstruction without other symptoms, recurrent epistaxis, anosmia
• Associated atopy/asthma requiring specialist evaluation (for example,
evaluation of allergies by allergy specialist with consideration for specific
immunotherapy)
• Children under 2 years of age (allergic rhinitis is uncommon in this age
group)

Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Have well controlled symptoms who require long term follow-up and
assessment

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:

Claimable
✓ Investigations for management of the disease or to evaluate for potential comorbid conditions (e.g. allergen-specific IgE tests, CT/MRI scans of paranasal
sinuses)
✓ Treatment options including intranasal steroid sprays and antihistamines
✓ Smoking cessation
Non-claimable
 Purchase of equipment such as High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) filters
or anti-dust mite covers and mattresses
 Surgical procedures (e.g., nasoendoscopy, cryoablation) where the
application for claims under day surgery is more appropriate
 Supplements such as vitamin C
 Non-HSA-registered medications (e.g. Allergen-specific immunotherapy)

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Allergic Rhinitis
sorders
 In general, nasal irrigation preparations (e.g. isotonic solutions that are
available over-the-counter) are non-claimable, except for nasal irrigation
preparations that are available in the MOH List of Subsidised Drugs (Sodium
bicarbonate & sodium chloride for use in nasal irrigation).

References
1. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines and revisions
a. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) 2008. Allergy. 2008;
63:8-160.
b. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines: 2010
Revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010; 126(3):466-476
c. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines – 2016
revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2017; 140(4):950-958.
2. MOH Clinical Practice Guidelines Rhinosinusitis and Allergic Rhinitis (Feb
2010)*

*MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless otherwise
specified in individual guidelines. While some components of previously issued guidelines may still be
relevant, users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines are only as current as the evidence
that supports them and new evidence can supersede recommendations made in the guidelines

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Gout
sorders
22. Gout
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required
to document these assessments in case notes)

Gout is a form of inflammatory arthritis caused by deposition of monosodium urate
(MSU) crystals in and around joints due to underlying chronic serum uric acid elevation.
It typically presents episodically as painful acute flares that may increase in frequency
or severity without appropriate management. In the long-term, complications of gout
include joint damage, urate nephrolithiasis, and chronic kidney disease. Gout is
associated with multiple comorbidities including renal impairment, obesity, diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidaemia.

Gout can be both primary or secondary gout, with secondary gout caused by
aetiologies that are potentially reversible once the offending substance is removed,
such as diuretic- or lead-induced gout.

The diagnosis of gout is a clinical one31, and patients typically present with acute onset
of severe pain and asymmetrical swelling affecting joints, most commonly the first
metatarsophalangeal joint (MTPJ) and ankle joints, and occasionally the knees and
small joints of the hands (proximal interphalangeal joints or PIPJs). Physical
examination usually yields erythema, warmth, swelling and tenderness of the affected
joint, with joint deformities noted in patients with chronic gout. Some patients also
report a strong family history of gout.

A patient can be further assessed to have one of the following:
1. 1st episode of acute gout
2. 1st episode of acute onset of periarticular gout (present at bursae or tendon
sheaths)
3. Recurrent gout (≥3-4 episodes per year)
4. Chronic tophaceous gout
5. Inter-critical gout (time between gout attacks)

31Asymptomatic hyperuricemia alone does not support a diagnosis of gout

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Gout
sorders
Part I: Recommended Care Components for Gout
Recommended
Care Component
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
Blood Pressure
Measurement
Twice a year
To personalise target blood pressure based on
patient’s risk factors.
Weight and BMI
Assessment
Twice a year
Keep BMI <23kg/m2 (for non-Asian population,
keep BMI <25 kg/m2).
Serum Uric Acid
At baseline and
thereafter as
clinically
indicated, as
treatment
requires
Frequency of monitoring to be tailored based on
clinical indication, as treatment required. If
patient is treated with urate lowering therapy
(ULT), repeat serum uric acid 4 to 8 weeks after
dose adjustment.
Consider serum uric acid < 360 µmol/L. Reducing
serum uric acid to < 300 µmol/L may further
reduce flare frequency and tophi, although higher
ULT doses may be required.
Kidney Function
Monitoring
At baseline
Baseline creatinine and eGFR to assess kidney
function. Consider yearly monitoring if patient on
periodic NSAID use. Frequency of monitoring to be
tailored based on clinical indication.
Alanine
Aminotransferase
(ALT), Aspartate
Transaminase
(AST)
At baseline
Baseline to exclude hepatic impairment and to
detect fatty liver (feature of metabolic syndrome).
If starting xanthine oxidase inhibitor (e.g.
allopurinol), consider repeating 4-8 weeks after
initiation and as clinically indicated thereafter to
monitor for deranged liver function.
Full Blood Count
(FBC)
At baseline
Consider
FBC
to
exclude
infection
or
haematological disorders.
If starting xanthine oxidase inhibitor (e.g.
allopurinol), consider repeating 4-8 weeks after
initiation and as clinically indicated thereafter to
monitor for leukocytosis and eosinophilia.
Erythrocyte
Sedimentation
Rate (ESR)
At baseline
(where
applicable)
Consider ESR to exclude other suspected
inflammatory arthritis (e.g. after acute gout attack
resolves).
Diabetes screening
At baseline;
consider yearly
thereafter
To detect insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus
(features of metabolic syndrome).
Lipid profile
At baseline;
consider yearly
thereafter
To detect dyslipidaemia (feature of metabolic
syndrome). All patients should be risk stratified
with targets of treatment tailored accordingly.
X-ray of Relevant
Joints
If clinically
indicated
Consider imaging to differentiate from other
inflammatory arthritides.
Assessment of Diet
and Lifestyle
 Annually
All patients should be advised on low purine diet
and lifestyle modification (alcohol avoidance and
smoking cessation).
*More frequently if clinically indicated

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Gout
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended

Specialist referral recommended in patients with recurrent/chronic gout and any
of the following:
• Severe or refractory gout (e.g. recurrent flares) despite reaching target
serum urate levels with adequate ULT treatment
• Difficulty in achieving the management goal with ULT, particularly with
renal impairment
• Chronic kidney disease with eGFR < 30 ml/min/1.73m2
• Serious adverse effects from  treatment including hypersensitivity to ULT

Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Have good disease control with infrequent acute flares and good ULT
tolerability

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:

Claimable
✓ Investigations leading to the positive diagnosis of gout, including serum uric
acid tests and joint aspiration
✓ Investigations for the management of gout, such as serum uric acid and
renal panel
✓ Medications used for the management of acute gout flares (e.g. colchicine,
oral NSAIDs, oral corticosteroids)
✓ Medications used for the long-term management of gout (e.g. ULT including
allopurinol)
✓ Investigations and management of complications of gout including urate
nephrolithiasis, if relevant
✓ Dietetics services for low-purine diet
Non-claimable
 Investigations to evaluate for hyperuricaemia when the patient is
asymptomatic or does not have a clinical history suggestive of gout
 ULT in patients with asymptomatic hyperuricaemia
 Traditional or complementary medicine

References
1. ACE Clinical Guidance on Gout – Achieving the management goal (updated 14
December 2023)
2. 2020 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the Management of
Gout (June 2020)

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Hepatitis B
sorders
23. Chronic Hepatitis B
(While clinical indicator submission is not currently required, clinicians are required
to document these assessments in case notes)

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is defined as either one of the following:
(a) Two HBsAg positive results taken at least 6 months apart, or
(b) A negative test for IgM-anti-HBc together with a positive test for HBsAg in a single
blood sample identifies chronic HBV infection.

Chronic HBV infection is usually asymptomatic, with symptoms only occurring late in
the disease course. However, HBV is one of the most common and preventable causes
of liver cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver failure, thus regular followup is important for early detection of abnormalities.

In Singapore, hepatitis B vaccination is part of the National Childhood Immunisation
Schedule (NCIS) and National Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS). Hepatitis B
screening is recommended in certain patient populations32 and can be performed with
a blood test. An antibody titre >10 IU/L is protective.


32  As recommended by the Screening Test Review Committee (STRC), hepatitis B screening is
recommended in the following individuals:
i.
Asymptomatic Singapore residents with no known hepatitis B carrier status born before 1987
who did not undergo the local catch-up immunisation programmes from 2001 to 2004
ii.
Pregnant women
iii.
Healthcare workers
iv.
Foreigners and immigrants from countries where HBV is endemic
v.
At risk groups: chronic haemodialysis patients, past or present injection drug users, individuals
who underwent invasive procedures in health-care facilities with inadequate infection control
practices, individuals with known exposures to HBV (e.g. healthcare workers following needle
stick injury involving HBV-positive blood, or recipients of blood or organs from a donor who
tested HBV-positive), individuals whose past or present sex partners were/are HBV-infected
or injection drug users, HIV patients

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Hepatitis B
sorders
Table 1: Viral Protein Tests and Clinical Significance
Viral Protein Test Clinical Significance
HBsAg
Hepatitis B
surface antigen
Detected in high levels in serum during acute infection and
persists for an average of 4 weeks after exposure to the virus.
Persistence beyond 6 months indicates chronic HBV infection.
Anti-HBs
Hepatitis B
surface antibody
Indicates recovery and immunity from HBV infection. Also
develops in a person successfully vaccinated against HBV.
IgM anti-HBc
IgM class
antibody to core
antigen
Indicates recent infection with HBV (<6 months).
HBeAg
Hepatitis B
envelope antigen
Those positive for HBeAg circulate HBV at very high titres in
their blood. This indicates high infectivity. Persistence of HBeAg
beyond 40 years old is associated with poorer prognosis.
Anti-HBe
Antibody to
HBeAg
Anti-HBe becomes detectable when HBeAg is lost and is
associated with low infectivity.

Table 23.2: Hepatitis B Screening Results and Clinical Interpretation
Results
HBsAg
Anti-HBs
Vaccination status
(course of 3 doses)
Interpretation
Recommended Action
Negative (or
nonreactive)
<10 IU/L
No
Not immune
to HBV
Administer hepatitis B
vaccination.
Negative (or
nonreactive)
<10 IU/L
Completed
recently within last
few months
Not immune
to HBV
Repeat hepatitis B
course of 3 doses and
recheck serology 6-8
weeks later. If no
antibody response,
consider referral to
Infectious Diseases.
Negative (or
nonreactive)
<10 IU/L
Completed many
years ago
Antibody
levels may
have waned
Administer 1 dose and
recheck Anti-HBs 6-8
weeks later. High
titres >100 convey
immunity for life. If no
antibody response, to
complete course of 3
doses and recheck.
Negative (or
nonreactive)
>10 IU/L
Regardless
Immune to
HBV
No vaccination
required.
Positive (or
reactive)
Regardless
HBV infection
Look for signs and
symptoms of acute
hepatitis. Repeat HBsAg
in 6 months.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Hepatitis B
sorders
Part I: Recommended Care Components for Chronic Hepatitis B
Recommended Care
Component
Minimum
Frequency*
Remarks
HBeAg#
At first visit
If positive at first visit, to recheck at age
40 years, or age 35 years if high-risk
factors present 33 ; if still positive, to
consider specialist referral. Frequency of
monitoring to be tailored based on
clinical indication.
Anti-HBe antibody#
At first visit

Liver Function Test (LFT)#
At first visit, and
minimally ALT
once every 6
months thereafter
Frequency of monitoring and specialist
referral to be tailored based on previous
ALT values and trends as well as HBeAg
status.
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)#
At first visit and
once every 6
months thereafter
AFP is a tumour marker used for HCC
surveillance.
Full Blood Count (FBC)
Consider at first
visit and once
every 6 months
thereafter
To
monitor
for
thrombocytopenia
associated with liver disease.
Ultrasound Hepatobiliary
System (US HBS)#
At first visit and
annually
thereafter
Frequency of imaging to be tailored based
on HCC risk.
Hepatitis A Screening/
Vaccination#
Consider anti-HAV
screening and
vaccination
Unless
contraindicated,
hepatitis
A
vaccination should be given to prevent
superimposed acute hepatitis A in
patients with chronic hepatitis B virus
infection.
Sexually Transmitted
Infections and Hepatitis C
Screening
Screening in
patients with
high-risk
behaviours34

Metabolic Disease
Screening
- blood pressure
measurement, lipid
profile, weight and BMI
assessment, diabetes
screening
As per guidelines
Development of fatty liver and metabolic
risk factors further increases risk of liver
cirrhosis and HCC.
Influenza Vaccination#
Annually or per
season
As recommended under the National
Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and
National
Childhood
Immunisation
Schedule (NCIS).
Pneumococcal
Vaccination (PPSV23
only)#
As per guidelines
depending on age
and other medical
conditions
As recommended under the National
Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) and
National
Childhood
Immunisation
Schedule (NCIS).
* More frequently if clinically indicated
# This is a non-reportable clinical indicator

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Hepatitis B
sorders
Part II: Consideration for Right-Siting Care
Specialist Referral Recommended

Gastroenterology referral recommended in patients with:
• Persistently elevated ALT
• Abnormal AFP
• Other abnormal lab results: low albumin, raised bilirubin, low platelets
• Signs of cirrhosis, HCC or other abnormal lesions on US HBS
• Positive HBeAg at 40 years old and beyond
• Clinical signs of chronic liver disease35
• HIV or hepatitis C co-infection
Emergency department referral recommended in patients with:
• Clinical signs suggestive of acute liver injury or hepatic decompensation36

Consider Anchoring Care with Primary Care Physician
In patients who:
• Are in stable condition/inactive carrier state without complications (e.g.
liver cirrhosis)

Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:

Claimable
✓ HBsAg and IgM anti-HBc tests leading to the positive diagnosis of chronic
hepatitis B infection
✓ Routine investigations for chronic hepatitis B follow-up and surveillance for
HCC (blood tests, US HBS)
✓ Medications for the management of chronic hepatitis B including antivirals
(e.g. Peginterferon alfa-2a, Entecavir)
✓ Medications for the treatment of complications of chronic hepatitis B
including liver cirrhosis, but excluding HCC




33 High-risk factors include family history of HCC, regular alcohol consumption or immunocompromised
state (history of HIV, long-term use of steroids, chemotherapy or immunotherapy).
34 High-risk behaviours include men who have sex with men, unprotected sex with multiple sexual
partners, injection drug users, tattoos, sharing of household articles contaminated with blood.
35 Clinical signs include jaundice, hepatomegaly, ascites, pedal oedema and other stigmata of chronic
liver disease (palmar erythema, spider naevi, telangiectasia, bleeding gums, purpura).
36 Clinical signs include new onset of clinical jaundice, acute or overt gastrointestinal bleeding or ALT
≥1000 U/L.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Chronic Hepatitis B
sorders
Part III: Claimable/Non-Claimable Items (continued)
Specific Examples of Claimable/Non-Claimable:
Non-claimable
 HBsAg tests for asymptomatic screening purposes not leading to the positive
diagnosis of chronic hepatitis B infection
 Health supplements or vitamins such as vitamin B (except for cases with
established deficiencies)
 Traditional or complementary medicine such as herbal medicine or
homeopathy
 Neoplasm treatment (including for HCC), which should be claimed under
other existing MediSave limits instead, such as limits for neoplasm scans,
chemotherapy or radiotherapy37

References
1. SingHealth Polyclinics Doctors’ Guidebook: Hepatitis B (updated Mar 2023)
2. National Healthcare Group Clinical Practice Guidelines: Management and
Follow-up of Chronic Hepatitis B infection (updated Nov 2019)
3. National University Polyclinics Clinical Practice Guidelines: Chronic Hepatitis B
(updated Feb 2024)
4. Academy Of Medicine, Singapore Report of the Screening Test Review
Committee (March 2019) Guidelines
5. Ministry of Health Clinical Practice Guidelines for Chronic Hep B Infection
(2011) *

*MOH clinical practice guidelines are considered withdrawn five years after publication unless otherwise
specified in individual guidelines. While some components of previously issued guidelines may still be
relevant, users should keep in mind that evidence-based guidelines are only as current as the evidence
that supports them and new evidence can supersede recommendations made in the guidelines.

37 While HCC is recognised as a complication for chronic hepatitis B so that patients are identified as
having a complex chronic condition, treatment for HCC will not be claimable under CDMP/CHAS. Cancer
patients are generally monitored for about 5 years after treatment completion, and scans or other
diagnostics done in this period are claimable under the $600 MediSave limit for neoplasm scans;
surveillance for HCC as a care component for chronic hepatitis B which is conducted 5 years after cancer
treatment completion should be claimed under the CDMP limit, and not the $600 neoplasm scans limit.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

CHAPTER FOUR:
CAPTURE AND SUBMISSION OF CLINICAL DATA

Commencement of Clinical Data Submission

Data submission should commence at the patient’s first visit to the doctor for selected
CDMP/CHAS conditions. These are Diabetes Mellitus/Pre-diabetes, Hypertension,
Lipid Disorders, Asthma, COPD and CKD (Nephritis/Nephrosis).

1.1
The quality of patient care for these chronic conditions will be evaluated
according to whether the relevant process and recommended care components
have been met as listed below:

Table 4.1: List of Clinical Indicators for CDMP/CHAS (for Submission)
Chronic Condition
         Reportable Clinical Indicators Per Year38
Diabetes Mellitus
• Two blood pressure measurements
• Two bodyweight measurements
• Two haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) tests
• One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test
• One kidney assessment (additional indicators for
patients with nephropathy will follow that of
Chronic Kidney Disease)
• One eye assessment
• One foot assessment
• One smoking assessment39
Pre-diabetes
• One blood pressure measurement
• Two bodyweight measurements
• One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test
• Two or more blood glucose tests (HbA1c, FPG, 2-hr
OGTT) as appropriate40
• One kidney function assessment (if on Metformin;
additional indicators for patients with nephropathy
will follow that of Chronic Kidney Disease)
• One smoking assessment39
Hypertension
• Two blood pressure measurements
• Two bodyweight measurements
• One kidney assessment (additional indicators for
patients with nephropathy will follow that of
Chronic Kidney Disease)
• One smoking assessment39
Lipid Disorders
• One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test
• One smoking assessment39

38 ‘Per year’ refers to 12 months from the first visit of the patient for the chronic condition(s).
39 Annual reporting for smokers, and once-off reporting required for non-smokers unless there is a
change in smoking habit.
40 Refer to Clinical Guidelines for Pre-diabetes (page 26) for more details.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Chronic Condition
         Reportable Clinical Indicators Per Year38
Asthma
• Two Asthma Control Assessments (GINA score)
• One smoking assessment39
COPD
• One bodyweight measurement
• One COPD Assessment Test (CAT) score
• One smoking assessment39
• One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
Chronic Kidney
Disease
(Nephritis/Nephrosis)
• Two blood pressure measurements
• One kidney function– serum creatinine and/or
eGFR
• One urinary protein – urine Protein Creatinine
Ratio (uPCR) or Albumin-Creatinine Ratio (uACR)

1.2
Although data submission is not required for the remaining conditions, clinicians
are advised to manage according to best clinical practices and document
recommended care components as listed below:

Table 4.2: List of Clinical Indicators for CDMP/CHAS (Routine Data Submission not
required)
Chronic Condition
  Minimum Clinical Indicators Per Year 38
Diabetes Mellitus
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
•
One or two pneumococcal vaccinations (depending on
age and other medical conditions)
Hypertension
•
One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test (at baseline)
Lipid Disorders
•
One serum transaminase (before starting statins and as
clinically indicated)
•
One serum creatine kinase (before starting statins and
as clinically indicated)
Asthma
•
One spirometry (at or soon after diagnosis, or when
clinically indicated)
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
•
One or two pneumococcal vaccinations (depending on
age and other medical conditions)
COPD
•
One spirometry (at diagnosis)
•
One or two pneumococcal vaccinations (depending on
age and other medical conditions)
Chronic Kidney
Disease (Nephritis/
Nephrosis)
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
•
One or two pneumococcal vaccinations (depending on
age and other medical conditions)
Schizophrenia

•
One blood test for fasting blood glucose and lipid
profile41
•
One Clinical Global Impression (CGI) Scale for each item
(severity, improvement)

41 Only for patients with Schizophrenia on atypical antipsychotic medications.

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Chronic Condition
  Minimum Clinical Indicators Per Year 38
•
One World Health Organisation Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) (at the intake assessment, prior
to step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
Major Depressive
Disorder

•
One PHQ-9 score (at the intake assessment, prior to
step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
•
One World Health Organisation Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) (at the intake assessment, prior
to step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
Bipolar Disorder
•
One Clinical Global Impression (CGI) Scale for each item
(severity, improvement)
•
One World Health Organisation Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) (at the intake assessment, prior
to step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
Anxiety Disorders
•
One GAD-7 score (at the intake assessment, prior to
step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
•
One World Health Organisation Disability Assessment
Schedule (WHODAS 2.0) (at the intake assessment, prior
to step-down/discharge and 6-monthly)
Stroke
•
One thromboembolism risk assessment (as clinically
indicated)
•
Two blood pressure measurements
•
One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test
•
One smoking assessment39
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
Major
Neurocognitive
Disorder (Dementia)
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
Osteoarthritis
•
One bodyweight measurement (if applicable, e.g.,
osteoarthritis of the knee)
•
One Basic Activities of Daily Living (ADL) assessment (if
appropriate)
Parkinson’s Disease
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
BPH
•
One Urinalysis (at initial assessment)
Epilepsy
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
Osteoporosis
•
One DXA scan (at least once every 1-3 years)
•
One WHO Fracture Risk Assessment Tool (FRAX Score)
Psoriasis
•
One Body Surface Area (BSA) percentage assessment
Ischaemic Heart
Disease
•
Two blood pressure measurements
•
Two body weight measurements
•
One serum cholesterol level (LDL-C) test
•
One smoking assessment39
•
One diagnostic diabetes test (annually or once every 3
years)

Ischaemic Heart

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Chronic Condition
  Minimum Clinical Indicators Per Year 38
•
One kidney function monitoring
•
One influenza vaccination (per year/season)
•
One or two pneumococcal vaccinations (depending on
age and other medical conditions)

Collection and Submission of Clinical Data

2.1
The recording of clinical data can be carried out by:
a)
Recording the clinical data directly onto electronic records through the
CMS installed for electronic submission of clinical data for CDMP/CHAS
enrolled patients; or
b)
Manually recording the clinical data on a hardcopy template. Please note
that for submission purposes the data will subsequently have to be keyed
in via the online CIDC e-Service (see Annex A: User Manual for e-Service
Clinical Data Submission on page 101) and/or the MHCP system (see the
MHCP User Guide available on the MHCP Resource Hub).

Deadlines for Submission of Clinical Data to MOH

3.1
Submission of clinical data is an essential and mandatory component of the
CDMP/CHAS.

3.2
We encourage clinics to submit clinical data as soon as possible, during or
immediately after the patient’s clinic visit, to minimise backlog in submitting
clinical data.

3.3
Clinics can accumulate patient records for submission in batches. However, for
batch submissions, regular (e.g. weekly) submissions are encouraged.

3.4
When using the CMS to capture data during the consultation, the system may
allow submission of data automatically at the end of each patient consultation.

3.5
The deadline for the clinical data submission will be one month after the end of
each visit.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
CHAPTER FIVE:
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

A. CLINICAL MATTERS

Q1. I have a patient with Diabetes Mellitus, Hyperlipidaemia and Asthma. Is my patient
eligible to claim for CDMP MediSave?


Your patient will be able to use MediSave/CHAS to co-pay for the total bill for the
treatment administered for all 3 conditions. You will also need to submit clinical data
based on the reportable clinical indicators of Diabetes, Lipid Disorders and Asthma.

Q2. My patient has Diabetes Mellitus. However, he also has symptoms and signs of
Hypothyroidism. Can I use his MediSave/CHAS to co-pay the thyroid function test?

In this instance, thyroid function test was done to screen for a possible condition and
not for monitoring of the primary condition or its complication(s). Hence, it is suggested
that his bill be itemised so that the patient can use cash to pay for the thyroid function
test and MediSave/CHAS to co-pay the rest of the bill which is related to Diabetes care
components. (Please refer to Chapter Three).

Q3. Who decides on the recommended care components?


The recommended care components were drawn from the MOH Clinical Practice
Guidelines, MOH ACE Clinical Guidances (ACGs) and best available evidence-based
practice where relevant, with inputs from professional bodies, which include leading
specialists in the respective fields and respected primary care physicians. They were also
endorsed by the Clinical Advisory Committee.

Q4. Can I make claims for ambulatory aids (e.g. walking sticks) for my patient with Stroke,
or for oxygen concentrators for my patient with COPD requiring long-term oxygen
therapy?


Currently, medical devices not used for the purposes of drug administration are
generally not claimable items under MediSave for CDMP/CHAS. However, for a patient
with COPD, he may withdraw up to $150 per month from MediSave for rental of devices
for long-term oxygen therapy, though it is not covered under CDMP/CHAS. Patients may
approach public hospitals for more information.

The Seniors’ Mobility and Enabling Fund (SMF) may be used to subsidise purchases of
mobility devices for means-tested patients above the age of 60 years old.

Q5. Can I claim for outpatient vaccinations and/or health screenings?

MediSave claims for the following conditions under the CDMP framework are allowed.
These claims fall under the same MediSave500/700 withdrawal limit as the CDMP, i.e.
$500/700 per patient per year from 1 January 2021.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Vaccinations
Vaccinations for recommended groups under the National Childhood Immunisation
Schedule (NCIS) and National Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS)

Selected Health Screenings
a)
Mammogram screening for women aged 50 and above; and
b)
Selected screening tests for newborns in the outpatient setting.


CHAS claims can be made in the following circumstances:

Vaccinations
a)
For patients who are included under recommended groups for vaccination
based on the National Childhood Immunisation Schedule (NCIS) and National
Adult Immunisation Schedule (NAIS) due to their chronic condition under the
CDMP, vaccination subsidies should be applied under the Vaccination and
Childhood Developmental Screening Scheme (VCDSS) subsidies implemented
since 1 Nov 2020. Any remaining co-payment required after applying VCDSS
subsidies can be claimed for under the chronic tier of CHAS subsidies as it is a
recommended care component of the relevant chronic condition and under
the MediSave500/700 scheme; and
b)
For patients not under recommended groups for vaccination based on the NCIS
and NAIS, the cost of consultation for vaccinations, but not the cost of the
vaccines, can be claimed under the acute tier of CHAS subsidies.

Selected Health Screenings
Tests for recommended health screening by the Health Promotion Board (HPB) are
subsidised at participating CHAS clinics under the Screen for Life (SFL) programme.


B. REGISTRATION MATTERS

Q1. What are the requirements to be on the CDMP?

Clinics that wish to participate in the CDMP must agree to:

a)
Treat patient medical information with confidentiality;
b)
Submit to MOH, with the informed consent of patient, data on patient care
delivery on a monthly basis or as specified by MOH. Relevant aggregated
performance data will be published to assist patients in making informed
choices;
c)
Be accredited for the use of MediSave for CDMP; and
d)
Be periodically reviewed and audited, both clinically and administratively. Any
clinic/medical institution that fails to satisfy the minimum standards of clinical
performance set by MOH, will be asked to withdraw from the Programme.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Q2. How do I register for the CDMP?

For clinics who are not in the CDMP, they must submit the following forms for
registration:

a)
E-Application for Clinics to Participate in the MediSave for Chronic Disease
Management Programme (by MOH);
b)
Direct Debit Authorisation Form (by CPF Board); and
c)
CEO/Director-level officer to accept CPF Board’s Terms and Condition via
FormSG.

The E-Application website can be accessed via
https://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/OverviewApplication.aspx

Doctors need to be individually registered under the Programme in order to process
MediSave claims for their patients. Doctors can do so by submitting the Application
Form
for
Medical
Professionals,
which
can
be
found
in
the
link:
http://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/DoctorApplication.aspx.

Q3. My clinic is already participating in CDMP. Can I make MediSave claims for my patient
who is suffering from Schizophrenia, Major Depression, Bipolar Disorder or Anxiety?

In addition to participating in CDMP, your clinic will also need to participate in the
Mental Health GP Partnership Programme (MHGPP) and attend the CDMP-MI training
provided under MHGPP. Upon fulfilling these requirements, your clinic can apply for
“CDMP-MI”
accreditation
via
https://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/OverviewApplication.aspx, and MediSave claims
for patients with mental illnesses can be made upon approval. This is part of an
assurance framework to ensure quality of care for patients. More details on the
requirements for MHGPP are under para 1.4 of Chapter Two: Registration and Medisave
Use.

Q4. How do I register for a Mental Health GP Partnership Programme with a Restructured
Hospital?


You
may
register
via
MOH’s
FSAE
website
(http://www.fsae.moh.gov.sg/mmae/overview.aspx) by selecting the “Chronic Disease
Management Programme (CDMP) – Shared Care Programmes”. Alternatively, you may
reach out to AIC at enquiries@aic.sg for more details on the Mental Health GP
Partnership Programme.

Q5. What will be the cost of registration and start-up?

Apart from computer hardware and internet access subscription (which may already be
in place), you or your staff will need to attend a half-day training session on MediSave
claims process, guidelines on MediSave use and the use of the MediClaim system. This
training session is free-of-charge.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Q6. How do patients sign up for the CDMP?

All patients treated by a MediSave -accredited doctor in a MediSave accredited clinic for
at least one of the approved chronic conditions are eligible for CDMP. The patients need
to complete the Medical Claims Authorisation Form in order for MediSave claims to be
made.

C. MEDISAVE CLAIMS, REIMBURSEMENT, BILLING

Q1. In total, how much can patients claim from MediSave for chronic disease treatments?

From 1 January 2021, patients can claim up to $500 per year for outpatient treatment
of their simple chronic conditions under the CDMP, and up to $700 per year for
outpatient treatment of their complex chronic conditions under the CDMP.

Patients aged 60 and above may also further claim up to $300 per year for such
treatments under the prevailing Flexi-MediSave limits. Taken together with CDMP limits,
they may claim up to $800 per year for simple chronic conditions, and $1,000 per year
for complex chronic conditions.

Q2. Whose MediSave account(s) can a patient make use of, apart from his/her own?

Patients can use their own MediSave account(s) and the account(s) of their immediate
family members (i.e. parents, children, and spouse). In addition, patients who are
Singapore Citizens or PRs can also use the MediSave accounts of their siblings or
grandchildren. Claims can be made once the MediSave payer has signed the relevant
Medical Claims Authorisation Form. The total amount that patients can claim from
MediSave, whether from their own account or account of family members, remains
subject to the relevant annual limits for chronic disease treatments (see q1).

Q3. What will be the exact level of deductible and co-payment?

There is a 15% co-payment of the CDMP bill for each claim that the patient has to pay
in cash. Patients who are aged 60 and above may tap on Flexi-MediSave to cover this
co-payment. Since 1 February 2024, the 15% co-payment is waived for patient seeking
CDMP treatment at their enrolled HSG clinic. They can use MediSave to fully pay for
their CDMP bills, up to the relevant annual limits (see q1).

Q4. Who should submit MediSave claims?

Any of the permanent staff of a MediSave-accredited clinic/medical institution who has
attended the training sessions, e.g. doctors, nurses, counter staff, clinic managers, can
submit MediSave claims.

Q5. If the patient sees me for both a chronic condition and an acute condition at the same
time, can the entire bill be claimed?

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
MediSave can only be used for treatment related to the CDMP conditions listed, subject
to a cap of $500 per patient per year. Patients with complex chronic conditions will be
eligible to withdraw up to $700 per patient per year. If patient attendance is purely for
an acute or unrelated condition, MediSave deduction is not allowed even though the
patient may have an existing chronic condition. Checks will be made during audits to
ensure that claims made are only in relation to the approved chronic conditions and/or
their complication(s).

Q6.  How does the annual cycle of the $500/700 limit apply? Is it calculated based on the
time that the patient first seeks treatment under the scheme?

The $500/700 annual limit is reset at the start of each calendar year, i.e. $500/700 for
the period from 1 January to 31 December. By default, the withdrawal limit will be reset
to $500, and will increase to $700 after a claim for a complex chronic condition is made.

Q7. Will MediSave use be allowed for purchasing equipment (e.g. blood pressure
monitoring equipment or glucometer etc.)?

In line with existing MediSave guidelines, MediSave use generally does not cover
equipment purchase, whether for chronic disease treatment or other uses, unless
otherwise specified in Chapter Three: The Clinical Guidelines of the Handbook.

Q8. How will I know if the patient has sufficient balance left for claims?

To help patients and their family members keep track of the amount of MediSave used
under MediSave500/700, participating clinics can check the MediSave balances under
the CDMP on behalf of their patients, upon authorisation from patient.

An enquiry function to check the available withdrawal amount is available via the
MediClaim / NPHC e-service, MHCP and selected Clinic Management Systems under the
SmartCMS Programme. Clinics may use this function to check the remaining balance of
the MediSave account holder with his/her consent.

Alternatively, you can request for the MediSave holders to show you a print-out or
electronic statement of their current MediSave balance. They can obtain their current
MediSave balance from the CPF Board's website (www.cpf.gov.sg) by logging in with
their SingPass at My CPF Online Services - My Statement. You may wish to ask your
patients to bring along a copy of the MediSave balance of all relevant MediSave payers
if you do not have a computer terminal at your clinic.

Q9. If the MediSave balance is insufficient to cover the costs, can the patient top up the
difference in cash?

Yes.

Q10. Can the bill be split among two or more accounts according to a given percentage?

Yes, a claim can be shared by a maximum of 10 MediSave accounts.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Q11. Will patients have to pay the full amount upfront and then be reimbursed or can they
make partial payment based on estimated MediSave payout?

This decision will depend on the individual clinics. However, clinics should explain to
their patients on the mode of payment clearly to avoid any confusion or unhappiness.

Q12. Is MediSave withdrawal dependent on the patient having only one specific primary
care provider?

No. Patients are encouraged to have continuity of care with one family physician, but
they are free to choose and switch providers. Hence, they can make MediSave claims at
any MediSave-accredited clinic. However, patients will not be eligible for the 15% copayment waiver if treatment is sought at clinics other than the one they have enrolled
at under Healthier SG.

Q13. How will claims be made if a patient is referred to an unaccredited provider?

MediSave claims will not be allowed at an unaccredited clinic.  However, the referring
party can make billing arrangements on behalf of his unaccredited partners, as long as
the referral is clinically relevant to support treatment and/or support of the approved
CDMP condition. The referring party is expected to bear full responsibility for any such
arrangements made, including if incorrect claim submissions are subsequently
discovered. In addition, the referring party is also responsible for the submission of
clinical data for the patient.  For avoidance of doubt, CDMP withdrawals should not be made
for patients managed by overseas doctors or institutions.

Q14. How will the scheme apply to Permanent Residents and Foreigners?

Current MediSave rules apply. Permanent Residents are able to tap on their immediate
family members (parent, child, spouse), siblings or grandchildren’s MediSave accounts.
Foreigners are able to tap on their immediate family members’ MediSave accounts.

Q15. How will the scheme apply to those who have employer medical benefits or an
existing comprehensive insurance plan?

Employer medical benefits (including for pensioners) or an existing comprehensive
insurance plan should be applied before MediSave use. Any amount in excess of the
employer medical benefits or the insurance plan can be paid using MediSave, and is
similarly subject to 15% cash co-payment. Clinics will have to liaise directly with their
partnering employers for payment under employer plans as per their current
arrangements.

Q16. What is the process of making MediSave claims like?  Will it involve a huge change in
my clinic operations?

The process is as follows:

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
a) The clinic/doctor should explain the following to patients suffering from any of the
approved chronic conditions and their immediate family member(s) whose
MediSave account(s) is/are being used (if any):
• the treatment components
• the cost of treatment
• estimated amount that can be claimed from MediSave
• the out-of-pocket cash payment that the patient will need to make

b)  When the patient and/or his/her immediate family member(s) have decided to use
MediSave for the bill, each MediSave account holder who wishes to make use of
his/her MediSave account need to sign a Medical Claims Authorisation Form (MCAF)
to authorise the CPF Board to deduct his/her MediSave savings for the treatment of
the patient. The authorisation can be made on a per treatment basis or over a period.
Authorisation over a period of time stands until revoked in writing. Clinic/medical
institution staff should ensure that the particulars stated on the form match those
stated in the NRIC or identification document provided and also verify relationships
declared, where possible. The clinic/medical institution staff should ensure that the
patient and additional MediSave payer(s) understand and acknowledge the relevant
paragraphs in the form. A witness has to verify that the patient and additional
MediSave payer(s) have completed and signed the form. The witness must be a
Singapore Citizen or Permanent Resident aged 21 years and above, and must not
lack mental capacity. Where the institution’s staff is acting as a witness, the SC/PR
and age requirements are lifted.

c) Clinics/medical institutions can then submit the MediSave claims electronically to
the CPF Board for processing via the MediClaim / NPHC System.

d)  Payment will be made daily to MediSave-accredited medical institutions via
InterBank Giro (IBG) on the 3rd working day after the approval date of the MediSave
claims.

Q17. Can admin fees be charged for claims?

No, clinics are not allowed to charge admin fees for MediSave claims.

Q18. Can GPs who are contracted by nursing homes to provide outpatient care for their
residents help the ones suffering from one of the approved chronic conditions make
MediSave claims?

Yes, if the GP and his/her clinic are accredited for MediSave use for CDMP. He/she can
help the nursing home patients to make a MediSave claim for their outpatient chronic
disease treatment(s) through his/her clinic.

Q19. Am I allowed to waive the 15% cash co-payment requirement for my patient?

No. Clinics that wish to provide discounts to the patients based on the clinics’ own
business model should account for the discount in the final bill amount submitted in the
claim system i.e. the final bill amount submitted in the claim system should be the

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
charge after the discount is applied. The 15% cash co-payment and MediSave-claimable
amount will be computed based on the charges after discounts are applied.

D. DATA SUBMISSION, CLINICAL IMPROVEMENT AND AUDITS

Q1. Why is the patient’s medical and treatment history required?

The data collected will provide a better profile of patients on CDMP/CHAS for
programme planning and management purposes.

Q2. Must the medical history be captured at each visit?

The items in the medical history data will only need to be captured once but should be
updated as and when there are changes.

Q3. How do I record the actual year of diagnosis of patients with long standing chronic
diseases?

The estimated year of diagnosis for the patient’s chronic condition can be recorded if
the exact year is not known.

Q4. Will data on all clinical parameters be required at every visit?

No. Only data on assessments or tests performed during the visit need to be captured.

Q5. Would I need to repeat HbA1c or LDL cholesterol if my patient is able to produce the
results of a test done elsewhere?

You can submit the relevant details of your patient’s test results that have been
performed elsewhere instead of repeating the test if it has not been submitted by the
other clinic. If you do so, please keep a copy of the record of the test results.

Q6. What if the patient is lost to follow up?

Please note it down in your clinical documentation. Alternatively, if you are using the
web-based CIDC e-Service for data submission, you may also document the information
using the textbox available under the Patient Participation Module present on the
navigation bar. If you are using CMS for data submission, please contact your CMS
provider for more details on capturing of this type of information electronically.

Q7.  What if the patient refuses certain tests?

Tests are performed, when indicated, as part of the proper management of the chronic
disease. As such, the physician should inform the patient as to the rationale and provide
other key information regarding these tests. If the patient refuses the tests, please note
this response in the patient’s clinic notes.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Q8. If I missed the previous deadline for submission of clinical data, do I still need to
submit the data for that period?

Yes, you should still submit the relevant data for that period as well as the current data.

Q9. Which healthcare provider should submit clinical data if the patient makes
MediSave/CHAS claims at three different healthcare providers over the year?

It would be appropriate for each provider to collect relevant data for the care that has
been provided, and to submit the data. If they are not able to make the submission, they
should forward the data to the primary physician who is coordinating the care of the
patient’s chronic condition so that he/she may be updated and make the submission.

Q10. If a patient starts making MediSave/CHAS claims from June onwards, must I submit
clinical information captured before June?

You can capture the relevant clinical data of the patient. However, for the purpose of
assessing the care process and outcome of the chronic condition, the period of one year
(taken from the date when the patient first enrolled into the CDMP/CHAS for the chronic
condition) will be used.

Q11. My patient claimed MediSave/CHAS for treatment of a chronic condition when he first
consulted me on 5 Jan, but paid cash for three subsequent visits (in Mar, Jul, Oct in
the same calendar year) for the same chronic condition. Would I still need to submit
clinical data for the latter three visits?

Yes, you should continue to submit the patient's clinical data on this chronic condition
for one year from 5 Jan.

Q12. Can the clinical data submitted be shared by different healthcare providers within the
same clinic/institution/cluster?

It is only allowed if consent has been obtained from patients to share their clinical data
with other clinics managing their conditions, through the Medical Claims Authorisation
Form (Single). Alternatively, clinics can have their own data sharing policies (in line with
the Personal Data Protection Act (PDPA)) which patients have to consent to.

Q13. If I have already fulfilled the number of reportable clinical indicators for the chronic
condition, do I still need to submit clinical data subsequently?

The reportable clinical indicators are part of the essential aspects of medical care that
are recommended for management of the chronic conditions. The data submission
system allows you to submit more than the recommended frequency of reportable
clinical indicators.

Q14. How will the clinical data submitted be used?

The clinical data received will be used to monitor clinical effectiveness of the CDMP.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

If the patient had signed the MCAF (Single) form, the clinical data can also be used:
a. to facilitate the patient’s treatment;
b. to check the patient’s healthcare information, withdraw from the patient’s
MediSave and/or claim for health insurance policies; and
c.
for data analysis, evaluation, and policy-making and review by the Government and
CPF Board.

If the patient had signed the MCAF (Multiple) form, the clinical data can also be used:
a. to check the patient’s Medisave and Health Insurance Policy information in order
to facilitate the patient’s claims;
b. to process and administer the patient’s claims;
c.
to assess and audit the patient’s Claims and adjudicate claims-related disputes; and
d.
for data analysis, evaluation and policy-making and review by the Government
and CPF Board.

Clinical data submitted to CIDC is available to clinics via the CDMP Online42 reports.  In
the CDMP Online reports, a clinic will be able to compare its performance against the
aggregated local and national performance under CDMP. Over time, each clinic will also
be able to track its own performance trends and is able to use the data for clinical quality
improvement within the clinic.

Q15. What will the clinical audit process be like?

Periodic audits will be carried out to ensure completeness/accuracy of clinical data
submission and to ensure that minimum standards of performance are met. Due
consideration will be given so that such audits do not disrupt clinic operations and
patient care processes.

Q16. What documents must I submit if my clinic is selected for audit?

Photocopies of the following documents should be submitted by post:

a) Doctor’s clinical notes for the visit/visits submitted for specified claim;
b) Laboratory results relevant to the medical condition(s) for which claim was made
e.g. HbA1c, lipid panel, spirometry test etc.;
c) Prescription or clinical notes with documentation of details of the drugs prescribed
(i.e. name of drug, frequency, dose, duration); and
d) Invoices/receipts showing the itemized breakdown (medication(s), investigation
(if any), consultation & total claim amount) of the bill(s) submitted for claim.

Q17. Am I allowed to divulge patients’ medical information to the CDMP/CHAS audit teams
for audit?

Yes, clinics are subject to audits by CDMP/CHAS auditors appointed by MOH, as stated
in the MediSave Terms & Conditions. In addition, the patient would have provided

42 This is accessible via CIDC online portal: https://cidc.moh.gov.sg/cidcweb/CorpPass/CorpPassLogin.aspx

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
consent to sharing his/her medical information under CDMP/CHAS for the purpose of
the audit when he/she signed the Medical Claims Authorisation Form/provides deemed
consent by presenting their CHAS card and/or accepting CHAS subsidies.

Q18. How do I submit my bills for audit?

All items claimed need to be itemised.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
Annex A

User Manual for Clinical Data Submission via CIDC E-Service

Introduction

1.1
Purpose

1.1.1 The manual serves as a guide on how to use the Clinical Indicators Data Collection
(CIDC) e-Service for the submission of data to MOH as part of CDMP.

1.1.2 The manual is intended for the hospital/clinic staff who are doing clinical data and
indicators submission. The staff should already be familiar with web browsing and the
MediClaim e-Service.

1.2
System Requirements

1.2.1 In order to use the CIDC e-Service, an Internet-enabled computer with the following
is required:

a)
Hardware Requirements
The minimum recommended hardware configuration is:
• CPU 1 GHz or faster process with 4GB or above RAM
• At least 10 GB free hard disk space

b)
System Software Requirements
• Windows 10
• Internet Explorer 11 or higher, Edge 42 or higher, Chrome 85 or higher,
Firefox 81 or higher, Safari 14 or higher
• Broadband Internet Connection

c)
Other Requirements
• CorpPass account

Getting Started

2.1
User Account

2.1.1 You will be using your CIDC system user account to access the CIDC e-Service.

2.1.2 If you do not have an account for the claim submission, you will need to approach
MOH for the creation of a new account.

2.2
Accessing the CIDC e-Service

2.2.1 The
web
URL
to
access
the
CIDC
system
is:
https://cidc.moh.gov.sg/cidcweb/CorpPass/CorpPassLogin.aspx.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Screen 1: CIDC Login Screen

2.2.2 Upon successful login to the CIDC system, you will be able to see the CIDC e-Service in
the left-hand menu as shown on Screen 2 below. All users with access to the Chronic Disease
Claim Form e-Service will have access to the CIDC e-Service.

2.2.3 Click on the menu to display the functions available:








Screen 2: Menu

a)
Submission is used to submit a new report.
b)
Search is used to retrieve submitted reports.

Clinical Indicators Report Submission

3.1
This function is used to submit clinical data on patients who have used their MediSave
under the CDMP. A new submission can be made each time there is additional indicator
information for the patient either on a per visit basis or consolidated over a few visits. All
submissions are distinct and will be used for analysis by MOH on a cumulative basis.

3.2
To submit a new set of clinical data for a patient to MOH, click on the “Submission”
sub-menu. The following screen will appear.



Click to go to Clinical
Indicator Form in Screen 4
Select the medical conditions
applicable to the patient, more than
one medical condition may be
chosen.
Select patient ID Type
Compulsory fields
marked with asterisk *
Enter patient NRIC/FIN

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Screen 3: Submission Form
3.2.1 Select the Identification Type and enter the Patient NRIC/FIN.
3.2.2 Select the chronic condition applicable to this patient. You can select one or more
conditions, as applicable.

3.2.3 Click on [Next] to proceed to the Clinical Indicator Form.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals


Screen 4: Clinical Indicator Form

3.3
The Clinical Indicator Form consists of 5 sections:
a)
Patient Details,
b)
Known Medical History,
c)
Clinical Indicators,
d)
Diagnosis codes, and
e)
Attending Physician Information.

Patient Details

4.1
This section details the patient’s basic bio-data. If it is your first submission for the
patient, only Patient NRIC, Name, Date of Birth, Sex, Race, and Current Smoker is required.
For subsequent submissions, only the Patient NRIC and Name are mandatory.

4.2
In the event of differences between two submissions, the data from the latest
submission will be considered as the up-to-date information.

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Screen 5: Patient Details

Known Medical History

5.1
This section details the patient’s medical history. If it is your first submission for the
patient, please enter all the details. For subsequent submissions, you can omit the details if
there are no changes.

5.2
If you are unsure whether you have submitted the information, it is recommended
you fill in the details.




Screen 6: Known Medical History and Treatment Sections

5.3
Enter the relevant medical conditions for the patient. If a particular condition is
selected, then the year of diagnosis is mandatory. You only need to fill in medical conditions
that apply to the patient.

Clinical Indicators

6.1
This section enables you to enter the indicator measurement and assessment done on
the patient over any period. Only measurements and assessments not reported previously
need to be entered in this section.

6.2
Initially there will be no clinical indicators added to the report.
If selected, the corresponding
date must be filled up as well
Textbox is disabled unless
corresponding checkbox is checked

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

6.3
Fill in all the clinical indicators and use the [Add Indicators] button to save them (as
shown in Screen 7).

6.4
There must not be any unsaved data left in the Clinical Indicators Section before
submitting the form.



Screen 7: Filling in the Clinical Indicators








Screen 8: Clinical and Assessment Indicators

6.5
After saving the data, you can use the delete button to remove any mistakes.

6.6
By default, the data displayed is sorted by date of visit and indicators. You can also
click on the “Indicators” and “Date” headers to sort the data according to your preference.
Add all Clinical
Indicators into the
table below after filling
in the form above
All entries saved in the table will
be submitted to the CIDC system
Delete after selecting the checkboxes
of the unwanted Clinical Indicators
Click to sort the records

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

6.7
After saving the data, you can use the delete button to remove any mistakes.

6.8
By default, the data displayed is sorted by date of visit and indicators. You can also
click on the “Indicators” and “Date” headers to sort the data according to your preference.

Attending Physician Information

7.1
This section details the physician attending to the patient. It is required for each
submission.

7.2
If there is more than one physician attending to the patient, the main physician
information should be entered here.


Screen 9: Physician Information

Report Submission

8.1
Once you have completed the data entry, you can submit the report to MOH by
clicking on the [Submit] button.

8.2
 If you are not yet ready to submit, you can click on the [Save Draft] button and retrieve
the report later from the search function for submission.



The Table below describes the function for each button:

 Button
Function Description
Submit
Submits the form after completion.
Deletes any existing drafts saved previously.
Save Draft
Saves the inputs in the unfinished form as a draft for
completion in the future.
Close
Closes the current form and returns to the main
menu.

Search Clinical Indicator Reports

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
9.1
After you have submitted a report or created a draft, you can retrieve the reports at a
later stage using the search function. This function allows you to specify search criteria and
retrieve all reports matching the criteria.

9.2
After retrieving the report, you can also proceed to “Amend” it if there was any
mistake in the previous submission, or delete it altogether.

9.3
To access this function, click on the “Search” sub-menu under the “Clinical Indicators”
main menu as shown on Screen 10.







                                 Screen 10: Search Menu

9.4
The Search page will be shown. Enter your search criteria and click on the [Search]
button. The search is case insensitive.

9.5
At least one of the search criteria must be entered before you can proceed with the
search.












                                   Screen 11: Search Criteria

9.6
All submissions made by your clinic which matches the criteria will be displayed as
shown on Screen 12.

Fill in at least one
search criteria
before doing a
search

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals




                            Screen 12: Search Results

9.7
If the number of search results is too large, you can either specify more restrictive
search criteria or use the page number to navigate through the results.

9.8
Click on the Patient Name hyperlink to view the report submitted.

9.9
When the [Amend] button is clicked, the selected record will be displayed in editable
mode as shown on Screen 13.







Click to retrieve all records that match
the specified criteria
Click on the hyperlink to
retrieve a read-only page
of the record
Check only one record for
amendment or many records
for deletion
Amend
selected record
Delete selected
records

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals




                              Screen 13: Editable Page of Patient Record

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

CIDC Clinic Reports

10.1
This function provides standard report(s) for use by clinics. One report is currently
available and additional reports may be added in future releases.

10.2
To access this function, click on the CIDC Clinic Reports under the Reports menu
button. A page displaying all the available reports and their description will be loaded.


                                      Screen 14: CIDC Clinic Reports


10.3
List of NRICs for patients for whom Clinical Indicators have not been submitted:

a)
This report enables the clinics to have a listing of all the patients’ NRICs for
whom the clinics had made claims in the specified year but no clinical indicator
reports were submitted within a fixed period of 12 months from the claim
submission date of each patient.  This report is built in to assist doctors and
clinics to keep track of the outstanding clinical indicator reports they would
require to submit with each claim.

b)
Click on the report title from the list of available reports as shown on Screen
15. A report page with a textbox would appear for the user to key in the year
of the requested report, as shown below.


                                         Screen 15: Selecting a Report
c) Upon entering a valid year, a list of patient NRIC numbers will be generated. The report
generated below shows the record of a patient who had a claim submitted but with
no submission of any clinical indicator.

Click on Reports menu and select CIDC
Clinics Reports
Click on a Report title from the list
of available reports

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals

Screen 16: Viewing a Report

Troubleshooting

11.1
Enabling of Pop Ups: Certain screens within the application will be displayed as popup windows. In order to access the full system functionality, you need to enable pop-up
windows for the MediClaim website. To enable this feature, follow the steps below:

a) Click Tools or the gear icon and click Internet options.

Screen 17: Internet Explorer Menu

Handbook for Healthcare Professionals
b) select Privacy, search and services, and click “Exceptions (Allow all trackers on sites
you choose)”

Screen 18: Internet Options – Privacy, search and services

c) Enter “*.medinet.gov.sg” and “*.moh.gov.sg” then click on Add.


Screen 19: Configuring Pop-up Blocker

Fall-Back Procedures

12.1
In the event that the submission cannot be done online immediately, you can keep a
record of the information and submit it at a later date.

Contact Information for Queries Related to Clinical Data Collection and Submission

13.1
For
online
e-service
related
technical
queries,
please
contact
Primary_Care@moh.gov.sg.