Singapore Med J 2014; 55(6): 334-347
doi: 10.11622/smedj.2014079
Clinical Practice Guidelines

List of institutions in alphabetical order
Changi General Hospital, Gleneagles Medical Centre, Khoo Teck Puat Hospital, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Raffles Hospital, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore
National Eye Centre, SingHealth Polyclinics, Ministry of Health, National Healthcare Group (HQ), National University Health System, TOUCH Community Services
Correspondence: Dr Goh Su Yen, Senior Consultant, Department of Endocrinology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, Singapore 169608. goh.su.yen@sgh.com.sg
1.1  Objectives and scope of guideline
The first edition of the MOH clinical practice guidelines on
diabetes mellitus for Singapore was published in 1999. Since that
time, more facts about this important condition have emerged,
not only with regard to its diagnosis and treatment, but also about
whether or not type 2 diabetes may be prevented, and, if so, how
this may be achieved.
As diabetes mellitus has great public health significance in
developed countries and developing nations alike, managing it
properly involves a consideration, not just of clinical issues, but
also of health economics. This second edition of the guidelines
attempts to address some of these complex issues wherever
evidence-based information pertaining to them is available.
1.2  Target group
The main aim of these guidelines is to help physicians make
sound clinical decisions about diabetes mellitus by presenting
up-to-date information about diagnosis, classification, treatment,
outcomes, and follow-up.
These guidelines are developed for all health care professionals
in Singapore. We hope they would be helpful especially to
primary care physicians who care for patients with diabetes
mellitus.
1.3  Guideline development
These guidelines have been produced by a committee of
endocrinologists, family practitioners and primary care
specialists, ophthalmologist, dietitian, social worker,
and patient representative, appointed by the Ministry of
Health. They were developed by the adaptation of existing
guidelines, by the review of relevant literature and by expert
clinical consensus with consideration of local practice. The
guidance does not override the individual responsibility of
healthcare professionals to make decisions appropriate to the
circumstances of the individual patient, in consultation with
the patient and/or guardian or carer.
1.4  What’s new in the revised guidelines
The following is a list of the major revisions and additions to the
previous guidelines:
•
In Chapter 3, we have explained the rationale for criteria in
diagnosing diabetes. In particular, for asymptomatic patients
with a first test that meets criteria, we have attempted to
provide more clarity on how to choose a second test, and
how to interpret the findings.
•
Chapter 4 is a new chapter which brings emphasis to two
areas contributing towards positive outcomes in diabetes
care: diabetes self-management education, and psychosocial
assessment and holistic care of the person with diabetes.
•
Chapter 5 on pharmacotherapy in diabetes mellitus has been
updated to take into account recent clinical trial evidence of
the efficacy of the newer classes of pharmacological agents.
•
Chapter 6 focuses on glycaemic control, and emphasizes
the importance of individualised targets, balancing the
benefits of achieving targets without incurring undue risk of
hypoglycaemia or other adverse effects, and considering the
risk profile of the patient.
•
In Chapter  7 on prevention of cardiovascular disease in
diabetes mellitus, recommendations on decision-making in
the area of therapeutics have been updated and harmonised
with current local guidance on lipid, blood pressure
and cardiovascular management. Target blood pressure
CMEArticle
Ministry of Health Clinical Practice Guidelines:
Diabetes Mellitus
Su Yen Goh, Seng Bin Ang, Yong Mong Bee, Richard YT Chen, Daphne Gardner, Emily Ho, Kala Adaikan, Alvin Lee,
Chung Horn Lee, Fong Seng Lim, Hwee Boon Lim, Su Chi Lim, Julie Seow, Abel Wah Ek Soh, Chee Fang Sum,
E Shyong Tai, Ah Chuan Thai, Tien Yin Wong, Fabian Yap
ABSTRACT The Ministry of Health (MOH) have updated the clinical practice guidelines on Diabetes Mellitus to provide
doctors and patients in Singapore with evidence-based treatment for diabetes mellitus. This article reproduces the
introduction and executive summary (with recommendations from the guidelines) from the MOH clinical practice guidelines
on Diabetes Mellitus, for the information of SMJ readers. Chapters and page numbers mentioned in the reproduced
extract refer to the full text of the guidelines, which are available from the Ministry of Health website: http://www.moh.
gov.sg/content/moh_web/healthprofessionalsportal/doctors/guidelines/cpg_medical.html. The recommendations should
be used with reference to the full text of the guidelines. Following this article are multiple choice questions based on
the full text of the guidelines.

Clinical Practice Guidelines

ranges and LDL levels are discussed, as well as the role of
antiplatelet therapy.
•
Chapter  8 on prevention and management of diabetic
nephropathy has been revised to present recent clinical
trial evidence regarding the efficacy of, and indications for,
the use of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and
angiotensin receptor blockers.
•
Chapter  9 on the prevention and management of eye
complications has been updated to include developments
such as intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial
growth factor in patients with diabetic macular oedema.
•
Chapter  11 on pre-gestational and gestational diabetes has
been updated. Women at high risk for gestational diabetes,
but who are not found to have glucose intolerance in early
pregnancy, are now recommended to be re-evaluated with a
75 gram OGTT at 24–28 weeks gestation.
•
Chapter 13 is a new chapter outlining key principles in the
management of the adult with type 1 diabetes, relevant to
the primary care healthcare professional.
1.5  Review of guidelines
Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines are only as current
as the evidence that supports them. Users must keep in mind
that new evidence could supersede recommendations in these
guidelines. The workgroup advises that these guidelines be
scheduled for review four years after publication, or earlier if new
evidence emerges that necessitates substantive changes to the
recommendations.
Future revisions may include management of hypoglycaemia
in persons with diabetes, and evolving areas like bariatric surgery
and pancreas/islet cell transplantation.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Details of the recommendations listed can be found in the main
text as the pages indicated.
Diagnosis and screening of diabetes mellitus in Singapore
D     In patients with hyperglycaemic crisis, diabetes mellitus
can be diagnosed without further testing (pg 42).
Grade D, Level 4
B     In patients with typical symptoms, diabetes mellitus can
be diagnosed if any one of the following is present.

  1.	 Casual plasma glucose >11.1 mmol/l

  2.	 Fasting plasma glucose >7.0 mmol/l

  3.	 2-hour post-challenge plasma glucose >11.1 mmol/l
Other individuals should have a repeat test on a subsequent
day (pg 42).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    When two different tests are available for the same patient
and the results for both tests are above the diagnostic
thresholds, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed (pg 42).
Grade D, Level 4
D    When two different tests are available in an individual and
the results are discordant, the test whose result is above the
diagnostic cut point (usually the fasting plasma glucose or
2-hour post-challenge glucose) should be repeated (pg 42).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Fasting plasma glucose measured in an accredited
laboratory is the preferred test for the diagnosis of
diabetes mellitus (pg 43).
Grade D, Level 4
B     All subjects with fasting plasma glucose from 6.1 to
6.9 mmol/l should undergo a 75 g oral glucose tolerance
test to determine if they have impaired glucose tolerance
or diabetes mellitus (pg 43).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    If a second test fails to confirm the diagnosis, barring
a laboratory error, such patients are likely to have test
results near the margins of the threshold for a diagnosis.
The healthcare professional might opt to follow the patient
closely and repeat the testing in 6–12 months (pg 43).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP  HbA1c is not recommended as a screening and diagnostic
tool for diabetes mellitus until its performance in our multiethnic population has been evaluated (pg 43).
GPP
B     Intermediate states of glucose metabolism termed impaired
fasting glucose and impaired glucose tolerance should be
recognised as defined in Table 1 (pg 46).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    Screening should be considered in adults of any age who
have one or more risk factors for diabetes. In those without
risk factors, testing should begin at 40 years (pg 47).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Subsequently, screening should be carried out every three
years for those with normal glucose tolerance and annually
for those with impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG) or impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT) (pg 47).
Grade D, Level 4
Lifestyle modification
D    Individuals who have diabetes should receive individualised
medical nutritional therapy as needed to achieve treatment
goals, preferably provided by a dietitian familiar with the
components of diabetes medical nutrition therapy (pg 49).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP  Special attention should be paid to the diabetic patient’s
dietary requirements during periods of sickness, fasting,
travel and exercise (pg 49).
GPP

Clinical Practice Guidelines

D    A diet for diabetes should contain a good balance of
carbohydrate, protein and fat, adjusted to meet the
individual’s metabolic goals and preferences (pg 50).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Individualised meal planning for diabetes should include
optimisation of food choices to meet recommended dietary
allowance for all micronutrients, providing adequate
vitamins and minerals (pg 50).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Meal and snack carbohydrate intake for diabetes should
be consistently distributed throughout the day, on a day to
day basis, as consistency in carbohydrate intake has been
shown to result in improved glycaemic control (pg 50).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    Consumption of macronutrients is based on recommended
dietary allowance (RDA) for healthy eating; 50–60% of
total energy from carbohydrates should be encouraged
(pg 50).
Grade D, Level 4
B    If weight reduction is needed, it should be attempted gradually
(0.25 to 1.0 kg/week). In overweight or obese patients with
type 2 diabetes, a weight loss of 5–10% of body weight
achieved through lifestyle interventions is a realistic goal
(pg 51).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    Dietary protein intake of approximately 15–20% of daily
energy intake is appropriate for most patients with type 2
diabetes (pg 51).
Grade D, Level 4
D    It is recommended that total calories from fat intake be kept
to <30% of total calorie intake in diabetic patients (pg 51).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Trans fats should be limited to 1% of total energy intake
and cholesterol intake (<200 mg daily) to reduce risk
for cardiovascular disease. These goals are similar for
individuals with pre-existing cardiovascular disease
(pg 52).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Recommendations for fibre intake for people with
diabetes are similar to the recommendation for the general
population. A daily consumption of a diet containing
20–35 g of dietary fibre from a wide variety of food sources
is recommended (pg 52).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    Sodium intake should be restricted to <2 g per day for
diabetic individuals with hypertension (pg 52).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Diabetes patients with poor glycaemic control or are
overweight should abstain from alcohol. If individuals choose
to drink, intake should be limited to a moderate amount, as per
the general population (no more than two drinks for women
per day and no more than three drinks per day for men) (pg 52).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Individuals who choose to use non-nutritive sweeteners
should be advised that some of these products might
contain energy and carbohydrate from sources that might
need to be accounted for (pg 52).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    For exercise more vigorous than brisk walking, a preexercise physician evaluation is recommended for
individuals with diabetes to identify cardiovascular risks
and any complications of severe neuropathy or severe
diabetic retinopathy that may contraindicate certain
activities and predispose to injury (pg 53).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Individuals with severe proliferative diabetic retinopathy
should avoid activities that greatly increase intraocular
pressure and risk of haemorrhage (pg 54).
Grade D, Level 3
B     Individuals with peripheral neuropathy and without acute
ulceration may participate in moderate weight-bearing
exercise. Comprehensive foot care, use of appropriate
footwear and daily foot check is recommended (pg 54).
Grade B, Level 2+
B     Individuals with type 2 diabetes should undertake at least
150 mins/week of moderate to vigorous aerobic exercise
spread out during at least 3 days of the week, with no more
than 2 consecutive days between bouts of exercise (pg 54).
Grade B, Level 1+
D    Individuals with diabetes, especially those on insulin
treatment or secretagogues, may require medication dose
adjustments and should receive specific education on the
prevention of exercise induced hypoglycaemia (pg 55).
Grade D, Level 4
C    Individuals with diabetes should be encouraged to stop
smoking (pg 55).
Grade C, Level 3
B     People with diabetes should receive Diabetes SelfManagement Education (DSME) when their diabetes is
diagnosed and as needed thereafter (pg 57).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    Assessment of psychological and social wellbeing should
be included as an ongoing part of diabetes management
(pg 59).
Grade D, Level 4

Clinical Practice Guidelines

D    Clinicians should provide the following psychosocial
support to patients during the diagnosis phase of diabetes
management:

  •	 Provide medical information and psychological support.

  •	 Be accessible and sensitive to patient’s needs.

  •	 Provide information and repeat if necessary as they
may not retain much at this stage.

  •	 Introduce to other patients to get them support and an
accepting environment

  •	 Involve other family members if necessary (pg 59).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Clinicians should provide the following psychosocial
support to patients during the maintenance phase of
diabetes management:

  •	 Motivate patient and family to maintain optimal
control

  •	 Create an individualised workable regimen and help
patient adhere to it

  •	 Ensure good support from diabetes team

  •	 Check for signs of diabetes burnout

  •	 Consider educational intervention

  •	 Follow up and review behavioural changes

  •	 Modify treatment if necessary (pg 60).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Clinicians should provide the following psychosocial
support to patients during the complications phase of
diabetes management:

  •	 Giving them the space to vent and providing them
with a lot of realistic reassurance is important

  •	 Do not overwhelm with information but allow for
grieving first

  •	 Gentle motivation to encourage patients to maintain
adherence to treatment regimen and possibly revising
some of the information or education will be helpful

  •	 Counselling is important but needs to be timely (pg 60).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Patients with diabetes should be encouraged to find
support from other persons and families living with
diabetes and community programmes which reinforces
diabetes education and promotes living well with diabetes.
These community based programmes provide a safe and
accepting environment for learning and sharing with others
who live with the same condition (pg 60).
Grade D, Level 4
Pharmacotherapy
B     Long-acting sulphonylureas e.g., chlorpropamide and
glibenclamide, carry a high risk of hypoglycaemia and
are not recommended (pg 62).
Grade B, Level 2++
A    Patients with type 2 diabetes may initially be treated with
lifestyle modification (diet and exercise) unless they are
symptomatic or severely hyperglycaemic (i.e. random blood
glucose >15 mmol/l or fasting blood glucose >10 mmol/l) –
in which case pharmacological therapy should be initiated
together with lifestyle intervention (pg 63).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Oral glucose lowering agents should be started if glycaemic
targets are not achieved in a timely and appropriate
manner (pg 63).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    If glycaemic targets are not reached with a single oral agent,
combination therapy with one or more agents (including
insulin) from other classes may be considered. However,
one would need to monitor carefully for adverse events
such as hypoglycaemia or fluid retention (pg 63).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Insulin therapy should be considered, if optimal
combination therapy fails to attain target control
(i.e., 2 consecutive HbA1c values failed to reach ≤ 8%
over 3–6 months interval) (pg 63).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Metformin is usually considered first-line pharmacotherapy,
and sulphonylureas/dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-IV)
inhibitors/alpha-glucosidase inhibitors are reasonable
alternatives as first-line pharmacotherapy (pg 64).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    For type 2 diabetes, two or more oral agents, or insulin
therapy, either alone or in combination with oral agents,
may be required (pg 64).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    For type  2 diabetes, other oral agents are acceptable
alternatives to metformin as initial monotherapy, if the
person does not tolerate metformin, or where metformin
is contraindicated (pg 64).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    In the setting of severely uncontrolled type 2 diabetes
(for example, HbA1c >10%, random glucose levels
consistently above 16.7mmol/L), the presence of
ketonuria, or symptomatic diabetes with polyuria,
polydipsia and weight loss, insulin therapy in combination
with lifestyle intervention may be the initial treatment of
choice (pg 64).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    In elderly patients, initiating therapy with low-dose, shortacting oral glucose lowering agents is recommended
(pg 65).
Grade D, Level 4

Clinical Practice Guidelines

D    Metformin is usually contraindicated in the presence of
severe renal or hepatic insufficiency as it may be associated
with lactic acidosis (pg 65).
Grade D, Level 4
D    It is advisable to use metformin with caution in those at risk
of a sudden deterioration in renal function and those with
eGFR <45ml/min/1.73m2 and to cease metformin usage if
the eGFR is below 30ml/min/1.73m2 (pg 65).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Metformin must be used with care in the presence of comorbid conditions which increase the risk of lactic acidosis
(e.g., class III or IV cardiac failure) (pg 66).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Thiazolidinediones (in particular, rosiglitazone) are
contraindicated in patients with acute coronary syndrome,
ischaemic heart disease, and all classes of heart failure
(including New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional
Classification Class I/II heart failure patients) and are also
not recommended for use in patients with peripheral arterial
disease (pg 66).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   Treatment choices should be individualised and culturally
appropriate, and patients should have the opportunity to
make informed decisions on their care and treatment options,
in partnership with their healthcare providers (pg 67).
GPP
D    The use of exenatide is not recommended in type  2
diabetes patients with a history of pancreatitis (pg 68).
Grade D, Level 4
A    All patients with type 1 diabetes must receive insulin.
Multiple daily injections (3 or more) or the use of
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII or insulin
pump therapy) may be required to achieve target glucose
levels (pg 68).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    Patients on insulin must be equipped not only with the
skills of insulin administration, but also should be educated
on self-monitoring of blood glucose, hypoglycaemia
management, matching of insulin dose and carbohydrate
intake, and dose adjustments during sick days, travel,
exercise, and changes in food intake (pg 68).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Insulin therapy should be managed with relevant
and regular insulin and hypoglycaemia-related selfmanagement training with the common goal of improved
glycaemic control and reduction in risk of severe
hypoglycaemia (pg 69).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    In type 2 diabetes, introduction of insulin should not be
delayed if metabolic control becomes suboptimal. This
may be initiated as a bedtime dose of intermediate-acting
or long-acting insulin with maintenance of oral agents
during the day (pg 75).
Grade D, Level 4
D    When glycaemic control is not achieved despite the
addition of basal insulin to oral agents, discontinuing
sulphonylureas and switching to premixed twice daily
or basal-bolus insulin regimens becomes necessary.
However, metformin and a-glucosidase inhibitors may
still be used in conjunction with exogenous insulin to
attenuate the insulin dose. Fine-tuning of insulin doses
is best determined by home blood glucose monitoring.
Patients with type 2 diabetes who are switched to insulin
therapy temporarily during episodes of acute stress,
such as sepsis, may be put back on oral agents when
their glycaemic control improves with declining insulin
resistance and glucotoxicity (pg 75).
Grade D, Level 4
Glycaemic control: assessment and targets
B     Self-monitoring of blood glucose is recommended for
patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes who are using
insulin (pg 77).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    Self-monitoring of blood glucose should be considered in
the following groups of patients with type 2 diabetes who
are not treated with insulin:

  •	 Those at increased risk of developing hypoglycaemia
or its consequences (e.g.,  patients who are using
sulphonylureas)

  •	 Those pregnant patients with pre-existing diabetes or
gestational diabetes

  •	 Those experiencing acute illness

  •	 Those who have failed to achieve glycaemic goals

  •	 Those undergoing fasting, for example, during Ramadan
(pg 78).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Self-monitoring of blood glucose should be carried out 3 or
more times daily for patients with type 1 diabetes (pg 79).
Grade B, Level 2++
GPP   For patients with unstable metabolic control, changes in
daily routine, alterations of treatment regimens or acute
illness, the frequency of self-monitoring of blood glucose
should be increased (pg 79).
GPP
GPP   Health care professionals should be familiar with the
practical use of glucometers (pg 79).
GPP

Clinical Practice Guidelines

B     To ensure optimal benefit from self-monitoring of blood
glucose, patients must be educated on the interpretation
of glucose levels (pg 80).
Grade B, Level 1+
GPP   Periodic reviews are recommended to verify users’
competency, together with comparisons between results
from patient self-testing of blood glucose in the clinic and
simultaneous laboratory testing (pg 80).
GPP
GPP   It is recommended that calibration checks of meters are
periodically conducted using standard solutions according
to the manufacturer’s recommendations (pg 80).
GPP
D    Continuous glucose monitoring (CGM) may be
used as a supplemental tool to SMBG in patients
with hypoglycaemia unawareness and/or frequent
hypoglycaemic episodes (pg 81).
Grade D, Level 3
B    Self-monitoring of urine glucose is not recommended for
monitoring of glycaemic status (pg 81).
Grade B, Level 1+
A    Ketone monitoring should be performed during sustained
hyperglycaemia (e.g., blood glucose > 14.0 mmol/l) in
patients with type  1 diabetes, especially during acute
illness. Blood ketone monitoring is preferable to urine
ketone monitoring (pg 81).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) should be performed
routinely in all patients with diabetes, at initial assessment
and then as part of follow-up care (pg 82).
Grade D, Level 4
D    The measurement of HbA1c should be done in laboratories
that utilise DCCT-aligned assays (DCCT - Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial) (pg 83).
Grade D, Level 4
D    The following schedule is recommended for HbA1c testing
in patients with diabetes:

  •	 3-  to 4-monthly in patients with unstable glycaemic
control, failure to meet treatment goals, recent
adjustment in therapy, or intensive insulin therapy.

  •	 6-monthly in patients who have stable glycaemic
control and who are meeting treatment goals (pg 83).
Grade D, Level 4
B     HbA1c result should be made available at the time that the
patient with diabetes is seen (pg 83).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    The targets of glycaemic control should be individualised
(pg 83).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   Patients should participate in the process of defining their
targets of glycaemic control (See Table 6) (pg 84).
GPP
A    The HbA1c target for most non-pregnant adults with type 1
or type 2 diabetes should be ≤7.0% or ≤53 mmol/mol
(pg 84).
Grade A, Level 1++
B     Lowering HbA1c target to ≤6.5% or ≤47.5 mmol/mol may
be considered for some patients with type 2 diabetes at
doctor and patient judgement, if this can be achieved
without significant hypoglycaemia. Such patients include
those with short duration of diabetes, long life expectancy
and no significant cardiovascular disease (pg 85).
Grade B, Level 1+
D    Less stringent HbA1c target (e.g.,  7.0 to 8.5% or
53 mmol/mol to 69.4 mmol/mol) may be adopted for some
patients vulnerable to the harmful effects associated with
tight glycaemic control. Such patients include those with
very long duration of diabetes, known history of severe
hypoglycaemia, advanced atherosclerosis and advanced
age (pg 85).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   Doctors should be vigilant in preventing hypoglycaemia
by reviewing treatment regimens in patients
with near-normal HbA1c levels (e.g.,  <6.0% or
42.1 mmol/mol), especially those treated with insulin
or insulin secretagogues (pg 86).
GPP
Prevention of cardiovascular disease in people with
diabetes mellitus
GPP    The assessment of cardiovascular risk in persons with
type 2 diabetes mellitus should include:
History – which should include:

  •	 Smoking

  •	 Hypertension

  •	 Pre-existing cardiovascular disease (including angina,
myocardial infarction, stroke, PAD)

  •	 Family history of premature coronary artery disease
(non-modifiable).
Physical examination – which should include:

  •	 Assessment for peripheral vascular disease

  •	 Measurement of blood pressure at every visit.
Tests – which should include:

  •	 Fasting serum lipids at or soon after diagnosis and at
least annually

  •	 Urine microalbumin or protein at least annually

  •	 Serum creatinine and estimation of eGFR (See chapter 8)

Clinical Practice Guidelines

  •	 Electrocardiogram (resting) routinely at baseline.
Subsequent ECG may be performed when clinically
indicated (pg 88).
GPP
B     For patients with type  2 diabetes mellitus who have
hypertension, an acceptable treatment-initiation and target
blood pressure is <140/80 mm Hg (pg 91).
Grade B, Level 2+
B     An angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or
angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) should be included as
part of antihypertensive regimen for people with type 2
diabetes requiring pharmacotherapy for hypertension,
unless not well tolerated (pg 93).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    All persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus should have
a full lipid profile, including low density lipoprotein
(LDL) cholesterol, fasting triglyceride and high density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, measured at the time of
diagnosis. These should be obtained after 10–12 hours
of fasting (pg 96).
Grade D, Level 4
D    If optimal, serum lipids should be measured 12-monthly
in persons with type 2 diabetes (pg 96).
Grade D, Level 4
D    The majority of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus should
have a primary low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
goal <2.6 mmol/L and should receive medical nutrition
and pharmacological therapy to achieve this goal (pg 96).
Grade D, Level 4
D     Patients with diabetes who have overt cardiovascular
disease and/or chronic kidney disease but are not on
maintenance hemodialysis should have low density
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol lowered with combination
of dietary and pharmacological means to a target of <2.1
mmol/L (pg 96).
Grade D, Level 4
D    When making a therapeutic decision with the patient,
the potential benefits of adding/increasing lipid-lowering
pharmacological treatment, needs to be considered
together with the potential risks of such treatment (pg 96).
Grade D, Level 4
D    For most patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus where low
density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is >2.6 mmol/L, an
HMG CoA reductase inhibitor (statin) should be started
concurrently with therapeutic lifestyle modification (pg 97).
Grade D, Level 4
D    It is reasonable to initiate low dose aspirin for primary
prevention in people with diabetes and no previous
history of vascular disease at age 50 years for men, and
60 years for women, provided they also have at least
one more of the following cardiovascular risk factors:
smoking, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, family history
of premature cardiovascular disease and albuminuria
(pg 99).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   In the presence of aspirin allergy, other antiplatelet agents
such as clopidogrel (75 mg per day) may be a reasonable
alternative for patients with high risk (pg 99).
GPP
Diabetic nephropathy – screening and treatment
D    It is recommended to perform an annual test to assess
urine albumin excretion in type 1 diabetic patients with
diabetes duration of 5 years and in all type 2 diabetic
patients, starting at diagnosis (pg 101).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Measure serum creatinine at least annually in all adults
with diabetes (regardless of the degree of urine albumin
excretion) is recommended. The serum creatinine should
be used to estimate glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
and stage the level of chronic kidney disease (CKD), if
present (pg 102).
Grade D, Level 4
C     It is only recommended to estimate renal function with
the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD)
equation when eGFR is below 60  mls/min/1.73m2
(pg 103).
Grade C, Level 2+
A    To reduce the risk or slow the progression of nephropathy,
optimised glucose control is recommended (pg 104).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    To reduce the risk or slow the progression of nephropathy,
optimised blood pressure control is recommended
(pg 104).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    It is recommended that in the treatment of the nonpregnant patient with micro-  or macroalbuminuria,
either angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) should be used
(pg 105).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    In patients with type 1 diabetes, with hypertension and any
degree of albuminuria, angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors are recommended (pg 105).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    In patients with type  2 diabetes, hypertension, and
microalbuminuria, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)

Clinical Practice Guidelines

inhibitors or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) are
recommended (pg 105).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    In patients with type  2 diabetes, hypertension,
macroalbuminuria, and renal insufficiency (serum
creatinine >1.5  mg/dl), angiotensin receptor blockers
(ARBs) are recommended (pg 105).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    In patients with diabetes, if one class [either angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor
blockers (ARBs)] is not tolerated, the other should be
substituted (pg 105).
Grade D, Level 4
D    When angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors,
angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) or diuretics are
used, it is recommended to monitor serum creatinine
and potassium levels for the development of acute kidney
disease and hyperkalemia (pg 106).
Grade D, Level 4
A    To reduce the risk or slow the progression of nephropathy,
optimised lipid control is recommended (pg 106).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Reduction of protein intake to 0.8–1.0 g per kg body wt
per day in individuals with diabetes and earlier stages of
chronic kidney disease (CKD) and to 0.8 g per kg body
wt per day in the later stages of CKD is recommended
to improve measures of renal function (urine albumin
excretion rate, GFR) (pg 107).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    It is recommended to consider a low-dose aspirin in diabetic
individuals with a history of vascular disease (pg 107).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    It is recommended to consider low-dose aspirin in diabetic
individuals who carry significant cardiovascular risk
burden (pg 107).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Continual monitoring of urine albumin excretion to assess
both response to therapy and progression of disease is
recommended for both type 1 and type 2 diabetes patients
(pg 108).
Grade D, Level 4
D    It is recommended that when estimated GFR (eGFR) is
<60  ml.min/1.73 m2, evaluate and manage potential
complications of Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) (pg 108).
Grade D, Level 4
D    It is recommended to consider referral to a physician
experienced in the care of kidney disease when there is
uncertainty about the etiology of kidney disease (heavy
proteinuria, active urine sediment, absence of retinopathy,
rapid decline in GFR), difficult management issues, or
advanced kidney disease (pg 108).
Grade D, Level 4
Prevention and management of eye complications
D    All patients diagnosed with diabetes require regular
visual acuity assessment and eye examinations by trained
personnel to screen for diabetic retinopathy using a test of
adequate sensitivity (pg 110).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Retinal screening preferably using retinal photography
or direct ophthalmoscopy (if retinal photography is not
available) through dilated pupils is recommended (pg 110).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Type 1 diabetic patients should have an eye examination
3–5 years after diagnosis of diabetes, and at least once
yearly subsequently. Type 2 diabetic patients should have
an ocular assessment at the time of diagnosis and at least
once yearly subsequently (pg 111).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Women with diabetes mellitus who intend to have
children should preferably have an eye examination
prior to conception, followed by one during the early
first trimester. Further eye examinations during pregnancy
may be done depending on the results of the first trimester
examination (pg 111).
Grade D, Level 4
A    Good glycaemic control (HbA1c preferably 6.5 to 7.5%
or 47.5 to 58.5 mmol/mol) should be instituted to reduce
the risk and progression of diabetic retinopathy (pg 113).
Grade A, Level 1+
D    Rapid normalisation of blood glucose may worsen
retinopathy and thus retinal assessment should be carried
out before initiation of intensive insulin therapy and then
at 3-monthly intervals for 6–12 months. Patients should be
carefully monitored during this period (pg 114).
Grade D, Level 3
A    Good control of blood pressure at or below 130/80 mmHg
should be instituted to reduce the risk and progression of
diabetic retinopathy (pg 114).
Grade A, Level 1+
B     Significant hyperlipidaemia should be treated to retard
diabetic retinopathy. Consideration should be given to
using fenofibrate (pg 115).
Grade B, Level 1+
GPP   Diabetic patients found to have diabetic macular oedema
or moderate and more severe non-retinopathy by their

Clinical Practice Guidelines

physicians should be referred for further ophthalmological
assessment (pg 117).
GPP
A    Timely laser therapy should be offered to patients with
proliferative diabetic retinopathy and diabetic macular
oedema (pg 118).
Grade A, Level 1+
GPP   Diabetic patients with visual acuity of 6/18 or worse or
with diabetic macular oedema should be referred for
further ophthalmological assessment (pg 118).
GPP
A    Pan-retinal laser photocoagulation should be instituted for
severe and proliferative diabetic retinopathy as it produces
a 50% reduction in risk for severe visual loss and need for
vitrectomy (pg 119).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Focal/grid laser photocoagulation should be instituted for
diabetic macular oedema as it results in a 50% reduction
in risk for moderate visual loss (pg 119).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Intravitreal injection of anti-vascular endothelial growth
factor (anti-VEGF) agents may be offered to patients with
diabetic macular oedema, particularly in cases where laser
photocoagulation has not been effective (pg 120).
Grade A, Level 1+
B      Vitrectomy may be offered to selected patients with
advanced diabetic retinopathy (pg 121).
Grade B, Level 1+
Prevention of diabetic foot complications
B     All individuals with diabetes should receive an annual
foot examination to identify high-risk foot conditions
(pg 124).
Grade B, Level 2+
B     The assessment of the feet involves risk identification,
treatment and patient education appropriate to the level
of risk (pg 124).
Grade B, Level 2+
GPP   All patients, regardless of risk category, should receive
ongoing education on footcare and footwear advice
(pg 124).
GPP
C    Patients identified with foot-related risk conditions should
have access to a specialised footcare team which should
include diabetes specialist, podiatrist, physiotherapist
trained in diabetes, diabetes nurse educator, vascular and
orthopaedic surgeons (pg 126).
Grade C, Level 3
GPP   Urgent referral to a specialised footcare team is needed
in the presence of ulcerations, severe foot infection and
gangrene (pg 128).
GPP
Management of women with pre-gestational and
gestational diabetes mellitus
B     All women with diabetes in the reproductive age group
should receive prepregnancy counselling, particularly
before starting a family (pg 132).
Grade B, Level 1GPP   Wherever possible, prepregnancy counselling should
be performed jointly by a multi-disciplinary team
skilled in diabetes care, including the physician,
obstetrician, dietician, nurse-educator and other
specialists (pg 133).
GPP
D    Risk assessment for gestational diabetes should be
undertaken at the first antenatal visit (pg 133).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Women at high-risk for gestational diabetes (GDM) should
undergo an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) as early in
pregnancy as feasible. Re-evaluation should be performed
at 24–28 weeks of gestation if glucose intolerance is not
present at the early screen (pg 134).
Grade B, Level 1+
D    In pregnant women who are not at high risk for gestational
diabetes, urine for glucose should be obtained at each
antenatal visit and random blood sugar levels ascertained
when there is ≥1+ glycosuria. A diagnostic test is necessary
if the random plasma blood glucose >6.6 mmol/l more
than 2 hours after a meal, or >7.0 mmol/l within 2 hours
of a meal (pg 135).
Grade D, Level 3
B     Gestational diabetes is diagnosed with a 75 g oral glucose
tolerance test (OGTT). A fasting venous plasma glucose
≥7.0 mmol/l or a 2-hour venous plasma glucose of ≥7.8
mmol/l is diagnostic of gestational diabetes. Casual venous
plasma levels ≥11.1 mmol/l on 2 successive occasions
would confirm gestational diabetes without recourse to
oral glucose tolerance testing (pg 135).
Grade B, Level 1
D    All women diagnosed with pregestational diabetes and
those diagnosed with gestational diabetes should receive
specialised care (pg 135).
Grade D, Level 3
B     In gestational diabetes, dietary control should be used in
the first instance to attain glycaemic goals. Sweet foods
should be avoided and caloric intake reduced if the woman
is overweight or obese. The diet should contain more

Clinical Practice Guidelines

complex carbohydrates, more fibre, and less saturated fat.
Nutritional counselling should be individualised, taking
into account the patient’s body weight, weight gain and
physical activity (pg 136).
Grade B, Level 2++
B     If nutritional therapy does not consistently maintain a
fasting or pre-meal capillary blood glucose of <5.5 mmol/l
and/or a 1-hour postprandial capillary glucose of <7.8
mmol/l or a 2-hour postprandial capillary blood glucose of
<6.7 mmol/l on two or more occasions within a 1–2 week
interval, insulin therapy should be considered (pg 136).
Grade B, Level 2++
C    In pregestational diabetes, individualised intensive (multidose) insulin therapy is often necessary to achieve and
maintain target blood glucose levels (pg 137).
Grade C, Level 2+
D    Maintain maternal capillary blood glucose concentrations
as near normal as possible at <5.5 mmol/l in the fasting or
pre-meal state, and/or <7.8 mmol/l one hour after meals,
or <6.7 mmol/l two hours after meals (pg 137).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Self-monitoring of blood glucose (SMBG) is essential
during pregnancy for women with gestational diabetes and
pregestational diabetes. Both preprandial and postprandial
testing are recommended to guide therapy in order to
achieve glycaemic targets (pg 137).
Grade D, Level 3
D    Women with pregestational type 1 diabetes should be
advised to test for ketonuria or ketonaemia if they become
hyperglycaemic or unwell (pg 137).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Oral glucose-lowering drugs are not recommended during
pregnancy under normal circumstances. Women with
pregestational type 2 diabetes who become pregnant while
taking oral glucose-lowering drugs should be switched to
insulin therapy (pg 138).
Grade D, Level 4
D    An early pregnancy scan should be performed to confirm
viability and accurately date the pregnancy in women
with pregestational diabetes, especially when glycaemic
control is suboptimal or changes in medications are
required (pg 138).
Grade D, Level 4
B     A detailed foetal anomaly scan, including four-chamber
cardiac view and outflow tracts, should be performed
between 18–22  weeks in women with pregestational
diabetes or when overt diabetes is diagnosed in the early
pregnancy (pg 138).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    Women with pregestational diabetes and gestational
diabetes should be offered ultrasound monitoring of foetal
growth (foetal abdominal circumference and/or estimated
foetal weight) and amniotic fluid volume every 4 weeks
from 28 to 36 weeks (pg 139).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Mothers with gestational diabetes mellitus and
pregestational diabetes should be taught to monitor foetal
movements during the last 10–12 weeks of pregnancy and
to report immediately any reduction in the perception of
foetal movements (pg 139).
Grade D, Level 4
C     Non-stress testing with cardiotocography and
umbilical doppler flow studies may be considered in
cases where hyperglycaemia warrants insulin therapy
and in cases where other high-risk factors are present
(pg 139).
Grade C, Level 2+
C    In women with gestational diabetes mellitus as well as
those with pregestational diabetes, the measurement of
blood pressure and dipstick testing for urinary protein
is recommended at each antenatal visit to detect the
development of pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia, especially if there is pre-existing nephropathy
(pg 139).
Grade C, Level 2+
GPP   Women with pregestational diabetes should have their
serum creatinine and electrolytes assessed at the first
antenatal visit and in the third trimester (pg 139).
GPP
B     For women with pregestational diabetes, a retinal
assessment should be performed as soon as possible
after the first antenatal visit if it has not been done in
the preceding 12 months. If any diabetic retinopathy is
present, an additional assessment should be performed
at 16–20  weeks of gestation. If the first assessment is
normal, an assessment should be repeated at 28 weeks
of gestation (pg 140).
Grade B, Level 2++
GPP   More frequent assessment may be required in women with
poor glycaemic control, hypertension and/or pre-existing
retinopathy (pg 140).
GPP
D    Women with insulin-treated pregestational diabetes
or gestational diabetes mellitus who are receiving
corticosteroids for foetal lung maturation should receive
additional insulin treatment and close monitoring of
glucose levels (pg 140).
Grade D, Level 4

Clinical Practice Guidelines

B     Betamimetic drugs (e.g., salbutamol) should not be used
for tocolysis in women with diabetes as they may lead to
significant hyperglycaemia (pg 140).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    Delivery should be at term for women with pregestational
diabetes and gestational diabetes mellitus unless
specific obstetric or medical factors dictate otherwise
(e.g.,  foetal macrosomia, poor glycaemic control,
polyhydramnios, pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth
restriction) (pg 140).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Vaginal delivery is preferable unless there is an obstetric or
medical contraindication. The presence of diabetes should
not itself constitute an indication for elective caesarean
delivery (pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
D    During labour and birth, capillary blood glucose should be
monitored every 1–4 hours in women with pregestational
diabetes and gestational diabetes mellitus and maintained
at 4–7 mmol/l (pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Intravenous dextrose and insulin infusion is recommended
during labour and birth for women whose blood glucose
is not maintained at 4–7 mmol/l (pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Women with pregestational type 1 diabetes should be
considered for intravenous dextrose and insulin infusion
from the onset of established labour (pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
D    The neonatologist should be informed of deliveries
of infants of women with diabetes so that possible
complications like neonatal hypoglycaemia may be
monitored and treated early (pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
C    Screening for abnormalities should also be performed in
infants of woman with diabetes soon after birth (pg 141).
Grade C, Level 2+
D    Babies of women with diabetes should be fed as soon as
possible after birth (within 30 minutes)(pg 141).
Grade D, Level 4
B     Infants of women with diabetes who present with
clinical signs of hypoglycaemia should have their blood
glucose tested and be treated with intravenous dextrose
as soon as possible. Close monitoring of blood glucose
levels is necessary within the first 48 hours of the baby’s
life (pg 141).
Grade B, Level 2+
B     Close monitoring of blood glucose levels is necessary
within the first 48 hours of the baby’s life. Infants of
diabetic mothers should be fed early (pg 142).
Grade B, Level 2+
D    Women with gestational diabetes should discontinue
glucose-lowering treatment immediately after birth and
monitor their blood glucose levels (pg 142).
Grade D, Level 4
D    Women with insulin-treated pregestational diabetes should
reduce their insulin doses immediately after birth and
monitor their blood glucose levels carefully to establish
the appropriate dose (pg 142).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   Women who are treated with insulin post-delivery
should be informed that they are at increased risk of
hypoglycaemia in the postnatal period, especially when
breastfeeding, and should be advised to have a meal or
snack available before or during feeds (pg 142).
GPP
D    Breastfeeding is recommended for infants of women with
diabetes (pg 142).
Grade D, Level 3
GPP   Insulin is recommended for glycaemic control in women
with diabetes who breastfeed (pg 142).
GPP
GPP   Women with pregestational diabetes who are breastfeeding
should continue to avoid any drugs for the treatment of
diabetes complications that were discontinued for safety
reasons in the pre-conception period (pg 143).
GPP
B     All subsequent pregnancies in women with gestational
diabetes carry a risk for gestational diabetes mellitus.
Early evaluation of glucose tolerance in future pregnancies
should be stressed (pg 143).
Grade B, Level 2++
D    Women with a history of gestational diabetes mellitus
should be offered lifestyle advice aimed at diet
modification, weight control and increasing physical
activity to reduce their risk of subsequent development
of diabetes (pg 143).
Grade D, Level 4
C    For women with gestational diabetes, a 75  g 2-h oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT) should be performed
6–12 weeks postpartum and the woman reclassified and
counselled according to criteria accepted in the nonpregnant state (pg 143).
Grade C, Level 2+

Clinical Practice Guidelines

D    Women with a history of gestational diabetes should have
lifelong screening for the development of prediabetes or
diabetes at least once every 3 years (pg 144).
Grade D, Level 4
D    In women with prediabetes or overt diabetes, glucose and
lipid profiles should be monitored if low-dose oestrogenprogestin oral contraceptives are used. These should,
however, be avoided in women with complications of
diabetes and/or other risk factors for vascular disease.
Progestin-only preparations may be suitable for these
women (pg 144).
Grade D, Level 3
D    Low-dose oestrogen-progestin oral contraceptives and
intrauterine devices are not contraindicated in women
with previous gestational diabetes (pg 144).
Grade D, Level 3
D    Oestrogen-progestogen contraceptives should be avoided
in women with complications of diabetes and/or other risk
factors for vascular disease (pg 144).
Grade D, Level 3
Management of the child and adolescent with diabetes
mellitus
GPP   Children and adolescents with suspected diabetes should
be referred to a specialist for early assessment, where
possible, on the same day (pg 145).
GPP
B     Children and adolescents with either type 1 diabetes or type 2
diabetes should be provided ongoing and structured diabetes
care by a multi-disciplinary diabetes care team (pg 146).
Grade B, Level 2++
GPP   Diabetes education should involve the family and child
to include learning about blood glucose monitoring,
insulin administration, hypoglycaemia and sick day
management. As the child matures, diabetes education
should emphasise self-care responsibilities shifting
from the parent to child, under parental guidance and
supervision (pg 146).
GPP
D    Include psycho-educational intervention strategies and
planned transition in the management of adolescents with
diabetes (pg 147).
Grade D, Level 4
GPP   Blood glucose targets should be individually determined
with a goal to achieving a value as close to normal as
possible as there is little age-related scientific evidence
for strict glucose targets (pg 148).
GPP
A    Children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus
or type 2 diabetes mellitus, and their families should be
informed that the target for long term blood glucose control
is a HbA1c level of less than 7.5% or 58.5 mmol/mol
without frequent hypoglycaemia (pg 148).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Children and adolescents with type  1 diabetes should
be encouraged to use blood glucose measurements for
monitoring of glycaemic control because it is associated
with reduced levels of HbA1c (pg 148).
Grade A, Level 1+
GPP   Consider the possibility of antecedent nocturnal
hypoglycaemia if fasting blood glucose is <4mmol/l (pg 148).
GPP
C    Screening for type 2 diabetes in asymptomatic children
and adolescents is not recommended as a public health
strategy (pg 149).
Grade C, Level 2+
GPP   Type 1 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents
should be managed by an endocrinologist or physician
with a special interest in childhood diabetes (pg 149).
GPP
C    Self-monitoring of blood glucose is an essential tool in the
optimal management of childhood and adolescent type 1
diabetes mellitus and should be used in conjunction with
insulin treatment (pg 150).
Grade C, Level 2+
C    Children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus
should be offered screening for:

  •	Thyroid disease at diagnosis and annually thereafter.

  •	Retinopathy annually from the age of 12 years.

  •	Microalbuminuria annually from the age of 12 years
(pg 150).
Grade C, Level 2+
C    Children with type 2 diabetes mellitus may initially be
treated with lifestyle modification (diet and exercise), unless
they are symptomatic or severely hyperglycaemic (pg 151).
Grade C, Level 2+
C    Lifestyle changes in diet and exercise should be
recommended for all children with type 2 diabetes mellitus
and continued, even after addition of pharmacologic
therapy (pg 152).
Grade C, Level 2+
C    Metformin may be started as the first-line oral agent in
children with type 2 diabetes mellitus if blood glucose
targets are not achieved. Insulin therapy should be started
if oral agents fail to attain target control (pg 152).
Grade C, Level 2+

Clinical Practice Guidelines

A    Metformin is contraindicated in children with impaired
renal function and hepatic disease, and should be
discontinued with any acute illness associated with
dehydration or hypoxaemia (pg 152).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    If monotherapy with metformin over 3–6 months has
failed, insulin should be added to the treatment (pg 152).
Grade A, Level 1+
C    Children and adolescents with type 2 diabetes mellitus
should be offered co-morbidity screening for:

  •	Albuminuria at diagnosis and annually thereafter.

  •	Hypertension at diagnosis and annually thereafter.

  •	Dyslipidaemia soon after diagnosis and annually
thereafter (pg 153).
Grade C, Level 2+
GPP   Albuminuria should be evaluated at diagnosis and blood
pressure should be evaluated at every visit. Confirmed
hypertension (BP >95% for age, gender and height) or
albuminuria can be treated with an angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (pg 153).
GPP
GPP   Pharmacotherapy is warranted if low density lipoprotein
remains elevated (≥3.4mmol/l) after 6  months of
optimised glucose control and diet. Statin therapy has
been shown to be safe and effective in children as in
adults and should be the first pharmacologic intervention,
although long term safety data are not available (pg 153).
GPP
GPP   Evaluation for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
and inquiries about puberty, menstrual irregularities and
obstructive sleep apnea should be done at diagnosis and
annually thereafter (pg 153).
GPP
Diagnosis and management of the adult with type 1
diabetes mellitus
GPP   Patients who are suspected to have type 1 diabetes should
be referred to the specialist promptly for assessment (pg
154).
GPP
GPP   Individuals with type 1 diabetes should have access to a
multi-disciplinary team consisting of an endocrinologist,
a nurse educator, a dietitian and a mental health
professional qualified to provide up to date education
and support (pg 155).
GPP
A    Most people with type  1 diabetes should be treated
with multiple dose insulin (MDI) injections (at least
three injections per day of prandial insulin and at least
one injection per day of basal insulin) or continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) (pg 155).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Most people with type  1 diabetes should use insulin
analogues to reduce the risk of hypoglycaemia (pg 155).
Grade A, Level 1+
A    Individuals using rapid-acting insulin by injection or
insulin pump should adjust the meal and snack insulin
doses based on the carbohydrate content of the meals
and snacks (pg 155).
Grade A, Level 1+
B     People with diabetes should receive diabetes selfmanagement education and ongoing support (pg 156).
Grade B, Level 2+
C    Screening of psychosocial functioning, especially anxiety
and depression should be performed.Those with positive
screening should be referred promptly for treatment (pg 157).
Grade C, Level 2+
GPP   Patients with type 1 diabetes should have thyroid function
checked every 1–2 years (pg 157).
GPP
Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus
B   Screening for asymptomatic individuals for type 2 diabetes
mellitus should be carried out on an opportunistic basis.
Testing should be considered in adults of any age who have
one or more risk factors for diabetes. In those without risk
factors, testing should begin at 40 years (pg 159).
Grade B, Level 2++
A  Lifestyle changes with modest weight loss (5–10% of body
weight) and moderate intensity physical activity (~30 minutes
daily) is the treatment of choice with individuals with impaired
fasting glucose/impaired glucose tolerance (pg 161).
Grade A, Level 1++
B   Metformin may be considered for the very high risk individual
(please refer to chapter on Diagnosis and screening) with
impaired fasting glucose/impaired glucose tolerance of age
<60 and BMI ≥35 kg/m2 (pg 162).
Grade B, Level 2++
Clinical quality improvement
A  Measures of process of diabetes care should include the
initial and ongoing performance of medical indicators which
have been proven to influence long-term outcome (pg 166).
Grade A, Level 1+
GPP   Data to measure the outcomes of diabetes management
should be obtained from the individual with diabetes
(pg 166).
GPP

Clinical Practice Guidelines

SINGAPORE MEDICAL COUNCIL CATEGORY 3B CME PROGRAMME
(Code SMJ 201406B)
Question 1. With regards to diagnosis of diabetes mellitus:
(a)	 In patients with hyperglycaemic crisis, diabetes mellitus can be diagnosed without further testing.
(b)	 Diabetes mellitus can be diagnosed if fasting plasma glucose is 6.5 mmol/l.
(c)	 When two different tests are available for the same patient and the results for both tests are above the diagnostic
thresholds, the diagnosis of diabetes is confirmed.
(d)	 Fasting plasma glucose measured in an accredited laboratory is the preferred test for the diagnosis of
diabetes mellitus.
Question 2. With regards to lifestyle modification:
(a)	 Medical nutrition therapy in diabetes only addresses glycaemic control.
(b)	 A diet for diabetes should contain a good balance of carbohydrate, protein and fat.
(c)	 If weight reduction is needed, it should be attempted rapidly  (1.00 to 2.0 kg/week).
(d)	 All individuals with type 2 diabetes should undertake at least 100 mins/week of moderate to vigorous
aerobic exercise.
Question 3. With regards to pharmacotherapy:
(a)	 All patients with type 1 diabetes need insulin treatment.
(b)	 Biguanides (metformin) decrease hepatic glucose release, enhance peripheral glucose disposal and
delay glucose absorption.
(c)	 In patients type 2 diabetes, one does not need to monitor for adverse events such as hypoglycaemia or fluid
retention.
(d)	 Metformin is the preferred choice for first-line oral glucose lowering therapy.
Question 4. When assessing glycaemic control:
(a)	 Self-monitoring of blood glucose should be considered for pregnant patients with pre-existing diabetes.
(b)	 Self-monitoring of blood glucose should be carried out 3 or more times daily for patients with type 1 diabetes.
(c)	 Self-monitoring of urine glucose is recommended for monitoring of glycaemic status.
(d)	 Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) should be performed routinely in all patients with diabetes, at initial
assessment and then as part of follow-up care.
Question 5. In terms of reducing the risk of additional complications in patients with diabetes:
(a)	 To reduce the risk or slow the progression of nephropathy, optimised blood pressure control is recommended.
(b)	 The recommended time of first eye examination is within one year after diagnosis of diabetes once
patient is aged ten years or older.
(c)	 All individuals with diabetes should receive an annual foot examination to identify high-risk foot conditions.
(d)	 Women with diabetes who are in the reproductive age group should receive prepregnancy counselling.
  True      False
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
  □      □
These questions are based on the full text of the guidelines which may be found at http://www.moh.gov.sg/content/moh_web/
healthprofessionalsportal/doctors/guidelines/cpg_medical.html
SUBMISSION INSTRUCTIONS:
(1) Log on at the SMJ website: http://www.sma.org.sg/publications/smjcurrentissue.aspx and select the appropriate set of questions. (2) Provide your name, email address and MCR
number. (3) Select your answers and click “Submit”.
RESULTS:
(1) Answers will be published in the SMJ August 2014 issue. (2) The MCR numbers of successful candidates will be posted online at the SMJ website by 4 August 2014. (3) Passing
mark is 60%. No mark will be deducted for incorrect answers. (4) The SMJ editorial office will submit the list of successful candidates to the Singapore Medical Council. (5) One
CME point is awarded for successful candidates.
Deadline for submission: (June 2014 SMJ 3B CME programme): 12 noon, 28 July 2014.
Doctor’s particulars:
Name in full
:_______________________________________________________________________________________________
MCR number
:________________________________________  Specialty:  _____________________________________________
Email address
:_______________________________________________________________________________________________