Diabetic Foot Care
The information in this brochure is meant for educational purposes and should not be used as a substitute for medical diagnosis
or treatment. Please seek your doctor’s advice before starting any treatment, or if you have any questions related to your health,
physical fitness or medical condition.
© 2024, National University Health Services Group Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or shared without
prior permission from National University Health Services Group Pte Ltd.

Information is correct at time of printing (Jun 2024) and subject to revision without prior notice.
Scan the QR code for
more information on our
patient care institutions.
Diabetic shoes are specially designed to protect diabetic
feet from ulcerations and skin breakdown. They have
a wide and deep toe box, stable support and can
accommodate offloading orthosis.
Diabetic Shoes
Rehabiliation Centre (F01-32)
NUH Main Building, Zone F, Level 1
14a Rehabilitation Centre
NUH Medical Centre, Zone B, Level 14
Appointment & general enquiries
Tel: (65) 6908 2222
Appointments: appointment@nuhs.edu.sg
General enquiries: rehab_enquiries@nuhs.edu.sg
National University Hospital
5 Lower Kent Ridge Road
Singapore 119074
www.nuh.com.sg
Diabetic Foot Care
e-Brochure
Diabetic Foot Care
Video (English)
Diabetic Foot Care
Video (Mandarin)
Diabetic Foot Care
Video (Malay)
Diabetic Foot Care
Video (Tamil)
Diabetes affects your feet in multiple ways, putting you at high risk of
ulceration, deformity and amputation.
Practical information in this pamphlet will help you protect your feet and
reduce the risk of above-mentioned complications

Diabetic Foot  DO’S
Diabetic Foot  DO’S
Diabetic Foot  DON’TS
Foot care with wound
Examine feet daily using a
mirror to look for cuts, sores or
toenail issues.
Wear shoes with soft socks and
change them daily.
Avoid walking barefoot.
Avoid flip flops as they may
cause blistering between toes.
Avoid exposing your foot to
hot water, by checking the
temperature with your hand first.
Do not perform any ‘self
procedure’ for wounds,
callosities or ingrown toenail.
•	Follow your doctor’s advice
	 regarding the wound dressings.
•	Do not allow dressings to get wet.
•	Consult doctor early if there is
	 increasing pain, fever or
	 discharge.
Control blood sugar, body weight
and avoid smoking.
Daily foot wash with warm water,
soap and then dry your feet and
web spaces (Not applicable if
wound is present).
Follow your appointment
schedule for podiatry/doctor
checks.
If you have dry skin, apply
moisturiser on top and bottom of
your feet. Keep web spaces dry.
Wear well-padded footwear and
check the insides of your shoes
regularly for any sharp objects.
Trim nails regularly. File sides to
prevent sharp edges.