Diabetes & Primary Care Vol 25 No 1 2023

How to manage diabetes during Ramadan (updated March 2023)
What and why
l	Healthcare professionals
need to be aware of
cultural and religious
practices that can impact
on a person with diabetes.
l	The decision to fast for
Ramadan should be made
with ample discussion
between the individual and
healthcare provider.
l	A decision should be made
after assessing the risks and
benefits.
l	It is advisable for
healthcare providers to
work closely with local
religious scholars to
implement key messages
within their community.
Citation: Gilani A (2023) How
to manage diabetes in Ramadan.
Diabetes & Primary Care 25: 27–9
References (continued on page 29)
1International Diabetes Federation
(IDF), Diabetes and Ramadan
(DAR) International Alliance
(2021) Diabetes and Ramadan:
Practical Guidelines 2021.
https://bit.ly/3l5KGkB
2Hanif S et al (2020) Managing people
with diabetes fasting for Ramadan
during the COVID-19 pandemic:
a South Asian Health Foundation
update. Diabet Med 37: 1094–1102
3Hassanein M et al (2014) Management
of type 2 diabetes in Ramadan:
Low-ratio premix insulin working
group practical advice. Indian J
Endocrinol Metab 18: 794–99
by Alia Gilani, Senior Diabetes Clinical Pharmacist, Sheffield
What is Ramadan?
l	Ramadan fasting (or sawm) is one of the Five Pillars of Islam, considered by believers to be the
foundation of Muslim life.
l Fasting occurs in the ninth month of the Islamic calendar (Hijra).
l The Islamic calendar is lunar based and has only 354 days. It therefore occurs 11 days earlier
each year.
l Ramadan has great religious and cultural importance for Muslims. Healthcare professionals need
to understand the impact this has on people with diabetes.
l	Worldwide, approximately 116 million people with diabetes fast during Ramadan.1
What does fasting entail?
l	Fasting entails abstinence from food, liquid and oral medications.
l	The fasting period occurs between sunrise (suhoor) and sunset (iftar).
l	Ramadan lasts for 29–30 days.
l	In the UK, a fast lasts 10–21 hours, depending on the season in which Ramadan falls.
Who should fast?
All healthy individuals after puberty should fast. Those for whom fasting is detrimental to their
health are exempt from doing so. This includes:
l Frail and elderly people.
l Children.
l Pregnant and breastfeeding women.
l People with comorbidities.
Pre-Ramadan diabetes education
A pre-Ramadan diabetes education session is advised 1–2 months before the fasting period. The
benefits of a structured diabetes education programme with a Ramadan focus include fewer
hypoglycaemic episodes, weight loss and improved glycaemic control.1 There are six key areas
that should be covered:1
l Risk quantification. Individuals can be stratified into one of three risk categories identified by
IDF-DAR.1 These are very high risk, high risk or moderate/low risk (see table overleaf).
l When to break the fast. A fast should be broken if: blood glucose levels are <3.9 or
>16.7 mmol/L; there are symptoms of hypoglycaemia; or an acute illness occurs.
l Exercise. Light-to-moderate exercise is advisable during Ramadan.
l	Fluids and dietary advice. A Ramadan nutrition plan is recommended (see overleaf).
l	Blood glucose monitoring. It is advisable to check blood glucose levels several times a day
(see right).3 This does not constitute breaking the fast.4
l	Medication adjustment: see page 29
When to check
blood glucose during
Ramadan fasting5
1. Pre-dawn meal (suhoor)
2. Morning
3. Midday
4. Mid-afternoon
5. Pre-sunset meal (iftar)
6. 2 hours after iftar
7. Any time when
symptoms of hypo- or
hyperglycaemia, or feeling
unwell.
To fast, or not to fast?
Risk stratification by a healthcare professional
should occur to establish if it is safe to fast.
Factors to consider include:
l Type of diabetes.
l Individual risk of hypoglycaemia.
l Patient medications.
l	Presence of comorbidities and/or
complications.
l	Social and work circumstances.
l	Previous experience of fasting.4
What are the risks of fasting?1
During Ramadan, a person with diabetes
who decides to fast can be at risk of:
l Hypoglycaemia.
l Hyperglycaemia.
l Dehydration and thrombosis.
l Diabetic ketoacidosis, including
euglycaemic DKA.
l Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state.2

Diet and lifestyle advice
Key messages include:1
l Use Ramadan as an opportunity to
make healthier food choices.
l	Keep well hydrated and drink
plenty of water.
l	Avoid fried food (e.g. pakoras,
samosas).
l	Minimise sugary foods.
l	Try to eat suhoor (morning meal)
as late as possible.
l	Minimise consumption of caffeine.
l	Try to have plenty of fresh fruit
and vegetables/salads.
l	Try to consume high-fibre and
starchy foods as these will release
energy slowly. These include:
chapatis, rice, oat-based cereals,
grains, seeds, beans and pulses.
l	Do not consume excessive dates,
as these can be high in sugar.
Tips for healthcare professionals
l Most studies (and based on the author’s experience) have indicated that the majority
of people with diabetes will participate in fasting despite the risks.7 If this occurs, it is
important for healthcare professionals to note this on a patient’s medical record and
document that advice has been given to minimise any risks of adverse effects.
l	To those who choose to fast despite it worsening their health, it can be advised that it is
deemed to be against the Quranic principles of Ramadan.
l	Those whose medical conditions are exacerbated by fasting can do non-consecutive fasts.
l	Review the patient’s previous experience of fasting.
l	Those who are unable to fast due to the long hours can switch to the winter months,
where the duration of fast is shorter.
l	People with diabetes can do a 1–2-day trial of fasting during the month preceding
Ramadan and review its effects.
l	Those who cannot partake in fasting can pay fidyah, an obligatory charitable donation
when there is a necessity to miss fasting. The current amount is £5 per fast missed.8
l	Reassure patients who are unable to fast that they can participate in other acts of charity
(e.g. giving donations, making and giving food to others).
l	 Where there is a significant population who partake in fasting, Ramadan education can
be delivered in multiple ways: community group education, liaise and work closely with
Islamic community leaders, develop Ramadan education patient information leaflets,
arrange healthcare professional educational updates, use of media (e.g. local radio stations).
28
Diabetes & Primary Care Vol 25 No 1 2023
Risk category and religious
opinion on fasting (boxed)*
Person characteristics
Comments
Category 1:
very high risk
One or more of the following:
•	 Poorly controlled type 1 diabetes
•	 Acute hyperglycaemic diabetes complications within the 3 months prior to
Ramadan (DKA, HHS)
•	 Disabling hypoglycaemia: severe hypoglycaemia within the 3 months prior to
Ramadan, history of hypoglycaemia unawareness, recurrent hypoglycaemia
•	 Advanced macrovascular complications
•	 T2D requiring insulin (MDI or biphasic insulin therapy) with no prior
experience of safe fasting
•	 Chronic dialysis or CKD stages 4 and 5
•	 Pregnancy in pre-existing diabetes, or GDM treated with insulin or SUs
•	 Acute illness
•	 Old age with ill health
If individual insists on fasting, then
they should:
•	 Receive structured education
•	 Be followed by a qualified
diabetes team and have access
for advice during fasting
•	 Check their blood glucose
regularly (SMBG)
•	 Adjust medication dose as per
recommendations
•	 Be prepared to break the
fast in case of hypo- or
hyperglycaemia
•	 Be prepared to stop the fast
in case of frequent hypo- or
hyperglycaemia or worsening
of other related medical
conditions
Category 2:
high risk
One or more of the following:
•	 Well-controlled T1D
•	 T2D with sustained poor glycaemic control**
•	 T2D requiring insulin (MDI or biphasic insulin therapy) with prior experience
of safe fasting
•	 T2D on SGLT2 inhibitors (consider alternatives/pausing during Ramadan)
•	 Stable macrovascular complications of diabetes
•	 CKD stage 3
•	 Women with T2D who are pregnant or GDM controlled by diet only or metformin
•	 People with comorbid conditions that present additional risk factors
•	 Treatment with drugs that may affect cognitive function
•	 People with diabetes performing intense physical labour
Category 3:
moderate/low risk
Well-controlled T2D treated with one or more of the following:
•	 Diet and lifestyle therapy
•	 Metformin
•	 Incretin-based therapies (DPP-4 inhibitors, GLP-1 receptor agonists)
•	 Thiazolidinedione (pioglitazone)
•	 Acarbose
•	 Second-generation SUs (moderate risk: regular SMBG advised)
•	 Basal insulin (moderate risk: regular SMBG advised)
*In each category, people with diabetes should follow medical opinion if the advice is not to fast due to high probability of harm.
**Consider HbA1c >75 mmol/mol for over 12 months.
If there is uncertainty about which group an individual falls into and they seek to fast, chapter 5 of the IDF/DAR guidelines1 includes a risk calculator.
CKD = chronic kidney disease; DKA = diabetic ketoacidosis; GDM = gestational diabetes mellitus; HSS = hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state; MDI=multiple-dose insulin;
SGLT2 = sodium–glucose cotransporter 2; SMBG = self-monitoring of blood glucose; SU = sulfonylurea; T1D = type 1 diabetes; T2D = type 2 diabetes.
British Islamic Medical Association6 risk categories and recommendations for people with diabetes who fast during Ramadan.
People who fast should:
•	 Receive structured education
•	 Check their blood glucose
regularly (SMBG)
•	 Adjust medication dose as per
recommendations
Religious opinion:
Listen to medical advice.
MUST NOT fast.
Religious opinion:
Listen to medical advice.
SHOULD NOT fast.
Religious opinion:
Listen to medical advice.
Decision to use licence not
to fast based on discretion of
medical opinion and ability of
the individual to tolerate fast.

How to manage diabetes during Ramadan
Diabetes & Primary Care Vol 25 No 1 2023

The act of fasting promotes spiritual benefit and
psychological wellbeing. However, an individual’s
decision to fast should be made by weighing the
benefits against the risks of exacerbating illness.
Those who become unwell during Ramadan and
are considering fasting can use the chart below as
a decision-making guide. Healthcare professionals
managing those with diabetes can use the risk
stratification table on the previous page as a shared
decision-making guide to determine whether it is
suitable to fast.6
Receiving a COVID-19 vaccine does not invalidate
one’s fast.10
Fasting and illness
New acute illness/
feeling unwell
Resume fasting
when health back
to normal. If unsure,
seek medical advice
Break fast/abstain
from fasting if:
1.	An illness that
worsens through
fasting*
2. Recovering
is delayed by
fasting*
3. Substantial fear of
1 or 2 occurring*
*Determined by any of the following:
l	 Prior experience of fasting with such
an illness.
l	 Common knowledge.
l	 The advice of a clinician.
OR
OR
Medication
l Taking oral medications during fasting hours invalidates the fast.1
l In general, the bigger dose of antidiabetes medication should be given at
iftar.
l During Ramadan, it may be prudent to choose antidiabetes agents that
have a lower risk of hypoglycaemia.
l Ideally, any new medications should be initiated 6–8 weeks prior to
Ramadan.6
l The recommendations for dose adjustment for antidiabetes agents are
shown in the table below.
Non-insulin dose modifications for people with
type 2 diabetes5
Metformin
Daily dose remains unchanged.
Immediate release: daily – take at iftar;
twice daily – take at iftar and suhoor; three-times daily – morning dose
at suhoor, combine afternoon and evening dose at iftar.
Prolonged release: take at iftar.
Thiazolidinediones
No dose modifications.
Dose can be taken with iftar or
suhoor.
Sulfonylurea (SU)
Switch to newer SU (gliclazide, glimepiride) where possible;
glibenclamide should be avoided.
Once daily – take at iftar. Dose may be reduced in people with good
glycaemic control.
Twice daily – iftar dose remains unchanged. Suhoor dose should be
reduced in people with good glycaemic control.9
For once-daily SU combination therapy, take at iftar and consider
reducing the dose by 50%.
For twice-daily SU combination therapy, omit morning dose and take
normal dose at iftar.
SGLT2 inhibitors
No dose modifications.
Dose should be taken with iftar.
Extra clear fluids should be
ingested during non-fasting
periods.
Use with caution in those at risk of
fluid depletion.
Prandial glucose regulators
(glinides)
Three-times daily dosing may
be reduced/redistributed to
two doses taken with iftar and
suhoor.
GLP-1 receptor agonists
No dose modifications.
If taking an oral formulation
(Rybelsus), take the tablet
at iftar and wait 30 minutes
before consuming any food.
DPP-4 inhibitors
No dose modifications.
References (continued)
4Muslim Spiritual Care Provision in the NHS
(2020) Ramadan Health Factsheet 2020.
https://bit.ly/3bCkhrB
5Hassanein M et al (2017) Diabetes and
Ramadan: Practical guidelines. Diabetes Res
Clin Pract 126: 303–16
6British Islamic Medical Association (2020)
Ramadan Rapid Review & Recommendations:
Risk table and recommendations summary.
https://bit.ly/3bcuCKt
7Jabbar A et al (2017) CREED study:
Hypoglycaemia during Ramadan in
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus from
three continents. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 132:
19–26
8Islamic Relief (2023) Fidya for missed fasts
during Ramadan. https://bit.ly/3EVOPTu
9Ali S et al (2016) Guidelines for managing
diabetes in Ramadan. Diabet Med 33:
1315–29
10British Islamic Medical Association (2021)
COVID-19 Vaccine Hub – Statements.
https://bit.ly/30cuyEf