Better Health.
With You.

Z Woodlands
Health

National Healthcare Group



Healthy Eating Guide for Diabetes



Diabetes is a condition when blood sugar (glucose) is higher than normal
because of a lack of insulin (Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus) or when the body
resists insulin (Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus).



When food is consumed, carbohydrates in food are broken down into
glucose and sent to the bloodstream.

QO





© Insulin is produced in the pancreas Insulin works as a key for
in response to rising blood glucose glucose to enter the cells
levels after eating carbohydrates to be used as energy
Insulin 5 Glucose
present in cell &
Glucose
_--Insulin



Oo In individuals without diabetes mellitus, insulin moves glucose into
cells efficiently



Insulin No Glucose
absent in cell

Glucose




® With type 1 diabetes mellitus, the lack of insulin leads to glucose
being unable to enter cells and remain in the bloodstream

Cells resist No Glucose
insulin in cell

Glucose







_ + Insulin

With type 2 diabetes mellitus, the body is resistant to insulin which
leads to glucose being unable to enter cells and remain in the
bloodstream

Treatment for diabetes may differ based on the type of diabetes
and blood sugar levels. To better manage this condition, it is

important for all individuals with diabetes to:
‘ * 8

és

om

Follow a healthy Perform regular Take oral medication(s)

diet and lifestyle blood sugar and/or insulin injection(s)
checks as prescribed





Healthy Eating Tips for Optimal Blood Sugar Control
1. Use My Healthy Plate to Plan a Well-balanced Meal

My Healthy Plate is a visual guide created by Health Promotion Board for
you to achieve a healthy and nutritionally-balanced diet.

% plate of wholegrains



Starchy vegetables such as

corn, yam and potato can
or starches ry P



be suitable alternatives to

Starchy veg wholegrains or starches










Wholemeal Brown rice/ wholegrain % plate of fruits and
bread noodles/ vegetables
bee hoon/ pasta
CE Ss > ei
a3 ‘ SS 1 slice 1 small
Oatmeal Chapati watermelon — apple

% plate of lean meat,

JI iM

>

S ‘
oe 1 medium 1 wedge
nuts, dairy/ soy % 9
¢ banana papaya
products or legumes
OSG WH ~~... eS
Meat/ poult P
sen pouy rawns L oe 150g raw leafy or
| ees ee vein Tp renee netstat
we Low-fat . , vegetables
Fish/ milk
Eggs
) Seafood gg
Risleeadixed eae f % cup cooked leafy
alm-size ‘
| or non-leaf
meat/ fish/ 4 le) & Ve =tobles
poultry Tofu Cooked lentils q

My Healthy Plate reproduced from https://www.healthhub.sg with permission by Health Promotion Board, Singapore

Note: Check with your dietitian on the recommended
@ portions for starches and protein-rich food



2. Know your Carbohydrates

Carbohydrate is the body's primary and preferred source of energy. In
our diet, we consume carbohydrates in the form of starches and sugars.



~.

Carbohydrates in food



Starches




a Z 3



Cereals Starchy Naturally Added
and grain vegetables occurring sugars
products and legumes* sugars



| =

Milk and dairy Fruits Honey Sugar sweetened



products* (Fructose) foods &
(Lactose) beverages

*Some protein-rich food like legumes, milk and dairy products also
contain carbohydrates. If consumed, its carbohydrate content should be
accounted for in your daily carbohydrate intake.



The type of carbohydrate you eat affects how quickly glucose enters your
blood. Different types of carbohydrates are broken down and absorbed
into your bloodstream at different rates.

Carbohydrates in the
form of sugars

=

Carbohydrates
with fibre




Blood
sugar
level






Carbohydrates
with fat



Time

« Red line: carbohydrates in the form of sugars causes your blood sugar
levels to peak much faster, resulting in unstable blood sugar levels

¢ Blue line: carbohydrates with fibre e.g. wholegrains, fruits and starchy
vegetables help to slow down the rate at which your blood sugar level
rises and peaks. A high fibre diet keeps you full longer and helps
maintain a healthy gut!

¢ Green line: meals high in fat delay the breakdown of carbohydrates.
This can make your blood sugar levels rise much later.

‘e
@oez¢





3. Keep your Meals Regular

Have regular meals by spacing your main meals 4 — 5 hours apart with an
optional healthy snack in between. It is important to keep meals
consistent and adhere to oral medication(s) or insulin injection(s) to
prevent erratic blood sugar levels.

Glucose Spike
Normal Response



8 am 12 pm 6pm

This graph compares the blood sugar pattern in 2 groups: those with

regular meal timing and consistent carbohydrate intake (green line) vs
those with irregular meal timing and inconsistent carbohydrate intake
(red line).

Feeling Thirsty?

High blood sugar symptoms include extreme thirst.
This can drive people with diabetes to crave cold,
sweet drinks to quench their thirst. Be mindful of this
sign and limit your intake of sugary beverages.





4. Go Easy on Sugar-sweetened Food and Drinks

When having meals

ood
aire

When choosing drinks



-_
=



Ay
Fash

When choosing a snack

Consider having less rice or noodles during
meals if you are planning to have desserts after

Choose frozen or fresh fruits instead of
preserved/ dried fruits or fruit juices

Go for “sugar-free” beverages e.g. plain water,
unsweetened tea/ coffee (“—Kosong”) or diet
soft drinks

Go for “Siew Dai” (less sweet) beverages if a
sugar-free beverage is not available

Use a small amount of artificial or natural nonsugar sweetener for sweetness if necessary

Replace sugary drinks with water and add
berries, citrus, mint, ginger or lemongrass for
flavour

Go for healthier choices like a serving of fresh
fruit, a small handful of non-fried unsalted nuts
or 3 pieces of wholegrain crackers. You can
also have a glass of unsweetened soymilk, low
fat milk or a handful of cherry tomatoes.

If you are having dessert, choose a small
serving or share with your family or friends



5. Go Easy on Food High in Fat

Fats do not convert to sugar when digested, instead they stay in our
stomach longer. Fats slow down the digestion of carbohydrates in a
meal, and prolongs the duration of high blood sugar levels.

Fats are high in calories and excessive intake can cause weight gain and

obesity. Some ways to reduce fat intake:

Choose lean meats or trim visible fats and
skin on meat before cooking or eating

Replace red or processed meat with fish,
lentils, tofu or soy protein

Choose low fat cooking methods (e.g. stir
frying, grilling, baking, steaming, boiling,
air-frying etc.)

Limit deep fried foods to no more than
twice a week

Ask for less gravies and sauces

Replace flavoured rice (e.g. nasi lemak,
chicken rice) with plain white or brown rice

Limit high fat tidbits and snacks (e.g. chips,
pastries, cakes, cookies, frozen pizza, frozen
fried food)



6. Choose Food Lower in Sodium

People with diabetes are at a higher risk of developing high blood
pressure. Reduce sodium intake to keep your blood pressure in check!

During Home Cooking & Grocery Shopping

¢ Taste your food before adding seasonings

* Use salt, seasoning and sauces sparingly

« Use fresh herbs & spices to flavour food

¢ Use fresh vegetables instead of ready-to-use broth to cook soup

* Cook food that require simple preparation like broiled, baked or
roasted meat or vegetables with no heavy sauces, breading or batter

$e





* Choose fresh produce over processed or preserved food items

* Choose food products labelled with the "No Added Sodium" or
“Lower in Sodium" Healthier Choice Symbols

RSMIER Cy NER Cy
Ss &S
ZF; CF

No Added Sodium Lower in Sodium












When Eating Out

* Leave soup behind & avoid excess gravy
« Avoid dipping sauces or condiments

« Choose plain rice over flavoured rice



(Soup)

Chicken Masala



Fast Food



:

Where is the
sodium?

Fishball
Soup
Sauces

Gravy
Seasoning for
rice and meat

Gravy
Seasoning for
meat

Salt in fries

Processed meats

Sauces

How to reduce
sodium intake

Leave soup
behind

Avoid dipping
soy sauce

Go easy on the
gravy

Share this dish
Choose plain rice

Go easy on the

gravy
Share this dish



¢ Ask for unsalted

fries

« Limit fast food

intake to once a
week

¢ Avoid dipping

sauces





7. Limit Alcohol

. . |
Alcohol can cause low blood sugar levels, especially if ais?
you are on insulin or certain types of oral medication La

Alcohol can cause low sugar levels when taken on an Ee. ee

empty stomach. Make sure to have some
carbohydrate-containing foods before or while o” ae

drinking.



Choose unsweetened soda to mix with liquor instead %)
of sweetened soda

Excessive intake of alcohol can contribute to overweight and obesity.
Should you wish to drink, limit to 2 standard drinks for men, and 1

standard drink for women.

1 Standard Drink = 10g Alcohol
| ie
330m| Beer 100ml Wine 30m! Spirits

8. Stay Active

Apart from following a healthy diet, regular physical activity can also help
to improve your blood sugar control and maintain a healthy body weight.

« Aim for 150-300 minutes of moderate-intensity 2
aerobic exercise; or 75-150 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic exercise; or a mix of both each week , yo

It is important to plan ahead to prevent low blood sugar levels during or

after your activity.

Contributed by Nutrition & Dietetics Service, Allied Health Services



This brochure is produced for educational purposes and should not be used as a substitute for medical

diagnosis or treatment. Please seek the advice of a qualified healthcare provider before starting any Scan OR
treatment or if you have any questions related to your health or medical condition. code to
download



Information shared is accurate as of April 2024 and subject to revision without prior notice. lig s e-brochure